Cprime Client Case Studies

Case Study #1

Company Details
Industry: Automotive manufacturing
Company Size: Over 44,000 employees worldwide
Location: UK (with facilities worldwide)
Products: Luxury cars, trucks, and SUVs
Cprime Services:
Agile in Hardware
Agile Training
Product Coaching
Executive Summary
This leading British car maker saw the need for faster time-to-market and smoother collaboration between UK and China teams as they pursued their new electric vehicle project. After facing disappointing results with an initial vendor, the luxury car leader reached out to Cprime for guidance building and scaling an Agile practice in their Shanghai manufacturing plant with stellar results.

The Challenge: The Need for Speed (to Market)
Many markets, representing millions of potential customers, have committed to banning the sale of gas-powered vehicles by 2035. Others have made voluntary arrangements to support the adoption of electric vehicles soon. This trend underscores the value and need for quick, efficient, and sustainable EV manufacturing—a challenge this company has proudly embraced.

Leadership committed to the electric vehicle project with a goal of opening production facilities in Shanghai, China. Seeing the need to get up and running quickly and ensure optimal collaboration between the Shanghai manufacturing teams and existing UK vehicle teams, establishing a solid Lean-Agile practice became a priority. 

But there were some formidable challenges to overcome:

Most members of the engineering and manufacturing teams in Shanghai were totally new to Agile, although familiar with Lean Manufacturing methods and concepts. So, they are learning a new way of working while simultaneously setting up new facilities, melding as a team, and taking on a new, high-priority project.
Multinational distributed teams can face barriers because of language and cultural differences, as well as the logistical issues caused by widely spaced time zones—there is only a three-hour window when teams in the UK and China are both working.
The company originally brought in an Agile Transformation vendor that failed to mesh effectively with the teams and didn’t make genuine progress. To reset the initiative, they brought in Cprime… and we have guided the Shanghai teams to perform “Above and Beyond” expectations.

The Solution: Expert Training and Coaching that Guides New Agile Teams to Scaled Success
Cprime Agile Coaches began working with the Shanghai teams in coordination with the company’s Lead Agile Coach in London. Success was a multi-step process.

Initial Planning
Training_Medium_black_coralDonald Ng, the Lead Agile Coach heading up the engagement for Cprime, worked directly with the UK team and all the Cprime coaches working onsite and remotely to set up both synchronous and asynchronous opportunities for collaboration on a cadence that fit everyone’s schedules and supported steady progress. 

Rather than attempting to take on everything at once, the plan was to start with a team of seven coaches working with about 60 team members. As the engagement progressed beyond the fundamentals, Cprime brought in two additional coaches to meet the program’s needs over the next three months. The teams were further organized into nineteen “squads” across three coaching groups as internal roles matured. 

Filling Necessary Agile Roles
At the start, the Cprime Agile Coaches took on the responsibilities of Scrum Master for the teams, besides coaching and training. Donald has worked closely with the client team to facilitate the hiring and training processes so internal associates could fill those roles as quickly as possible. 

Now, all the teams’ Scrum Masters and Product Owners are well-qualified internal team members and the Cprime coaches can focus wholly on coaching and training the teams for success. The three coaching groups now comprise two or three Cprime coaches, six internal Product Owners, and three Scrum Masters from six different squads.

Agile Training
To ground the Shanghai teams in the fundamentals of Agile and how to apply them in the manufacturing environment, the coaches facilitated several training courses over four months. These included:

Twelve core module courses covering three topics (Agile Mindset, Introduction to Scrum, and the client’s unique framework for scaling Agility)
Fifteen bite-size learning sessions on various topics developed to fill specific gaps, including Jira and Confluence fundamentals, Innovations Stories Sharing, and Kanban fundamentals.
Seven role-based sessions to train and support new Scrum Masters and Product Owners. 
Additionally, a Leadership Training program is slated to begin to broaden organizational support for the growing Agile practice.

Ongoing Stabilization and Scaling
As the Agile practice develops and scales, stabilization is required to ensure the organization maintains continuous improvement and reaps all the benefits of Agility. The core stabilizing factor is the Agile Community of Practice (CoP).

CoPs are groups of people organized around a specific technical or business domain. A healthy CoP actively focuses on professional networking, personal relationships, shared knowledge, and common skills, forming a strong and welcoming culture within the represented teams. As a result, knowledge workers enjoy autonomy, mastery, and purpose beyond their daily tasks.

In collaboration with the Scrum Masters, Cprime coaches have organized a strong and growing Agile Community of Practice supporting the Shanghai and UK teams’ ongoing stabilization.

The Results: Burgeoning Agile Maturity, Continuous Improvement, and Delighted Teams
By the end of November, the teams had worked together through eight sprints, each an improvement over the last. This trend of continuous improvement will continue and even accelerate as the new Agile leaders mature and the Cprime coaches are now free to focus only on coaching and development.

Excellent Net Promoter Scores (NPS) Following Training
Prior to Cprime’s involvement, the client had no formal process in place for measuring the efficacy and value of training and development. By introducing the NPS process, the coaches could measure the value of the Agile training programs they facilitated so that these, too, could continuously improve.

An NPS can range from -100 (very poor) to 100 (essentially perfect). The average NPSs for Cprime-led training courses in Shanghai were:

72.7 on the twelve core module courses
70.9 on the 15 bite-size sessions
74.3 on the seven role-based course
Delighted Team Members
Another measurement tool introduced by the coaches is a Coaching Assessment that allows the team members to rate the value of the coaching they are receiving. The following comments from team members reflect their sentiments:

“The coaches encourage the teams and organize our meetings very well.”
“They work very hard to help the teams.”
“The Agile coaches are very good to new employees. They guide us through the projects, helping us understand the detailed background, and solving any problems or questions that come up along the way.”
“Team meetings are held efficiently within a timebox, and we are avoiding unnecessary meetings.” 
“The coaches have strong professional knowledge and are proactive in communicating with other groups, and escalating issues when necessary.”
The Shanghai teams are poised for continued growth and acceleration. With continued support from Cprime Agile Coaches and In collaboration with the Agile teams at the group level in the UK, we foresee ongoing success.













Case Study #2

Company Details
Industry: Networking Hardware and Telecommunications Equipment Manufacturing, Software, and IT Services
Company Size: 26,000 (excluding contractors)
Location: San Jose, California with offices worldwide
Products: Network Hardware, Security Products, Collaboration Tools, Managed Services, and IOT Applications
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Jira Implementation and Customization
Atlassian Cloud Migration
Agile Training
Enterprise Agile Coaching
Executive Summary
Following years of growth, this global communications leader struggled against a variety of development frameworks and project management tools. Seeking a holistic solution, the company called upon Cprime for a blended transformation of both its agile ways of working and software tooling. The engagement resulted in unprecedented Levels of visibility, traceability, and communication.

The Client
This Cprime client is one of the world’s foremost networking hardware, software, and telecommunications equipment providers. Since 1984, it has created an expansive portfolio of routers, switches, wireless access points, security products, collaboration tools, managed services, and IoT applications.

Today, the California-based technology company operates in over 100 countries. Recognized for its innovations and commitment to delivering high-quality products and services, the company serves a variety of data-intensive industries, including healthcare, finance, education, and government.

The company reported revenues of over $51 billion in 2022.

The Challenge: Finding a Common Language and Reconnecting Siloed Teams
Because of the size of its workforce and complex portfolio of products and services, the network and communications provider faced a set of challenges typical of many established enterprises. Decades of growth and incremental process changes had created a disconnect between its leadership, departments, and teams.

“Over the years, the company adopted a variety of tools and frameworks—everyone interacted and worked differently,” explains Chuck Badger, Managing Director at Cprime. “If a developer transferred from one business unit to another, they had to start over, both from a tooling and a process perspective.”

“It’s a common dilemma for organizations of this scale,” adds Elida Parish, Managing Director of Customer Success at Cprime. “Throughout the company, they developed pockets of people using different tools and trying different things. Every team had adopted its own process. Moving from area to area, they were speaking past each other—not even using the same terminology.”


“Every team had adopted its own way of working. Moving from area to area, they were speaking past each other—not even using the same terminology.” — Elida Parish, Cprime, Managing Director, Customer Success

Increasing Transparency to Improve Strategic Planning
Besides creating communication issues, the information silos between areas hindered the company executive’s efforts to evaluate the business and plan strategically. The lack of visibility affected the company’s time to market and its ability to plan and invest in future initiatives. Declining quality and increasing costs and delivery times across the organization were also key concerns.

“With everybody on a different page, there was no way for the company to roll up consistent reporting,” explains John Kosco, Cprime Enterprise Agile Transformation Consultant. “They just didn’t have visibility into what was happening in their different agile teams. They needed to raise transparency so leadership could prioritize and manage portfolios to ensure that everyone was doing the right work. And, they had to implement a unified framework to ensure the work was being done right.”

“Leadership recognized that they had to standardize,” says Parish. “The goal was to improve throughput and deliver value faster by adopting a cloud-first, single project management framework, to drive alignment by moving disconnected teams onto a centralized tech stack, and to more effectively identify and meet business needs by creating a unified picture of the business.”

Besides aligning its teams under a standard framework using a central tool, the company wanted to move its infrastructure online to take greater advantage of cloud technologies.

The Solution: Cprime Cross-Functional Teams for Holistic Cultural and Technical Transformation
To accomplish its goals, the company needed to perform three core tasks—promote a common, internally developed agile framework, onboard a centralized platform as a single source of truth for reporting and project management, and migrate all production data onto that platform and into the cloud without disrupting the business. It was a hybrid initiative—both cultural and technical—affecting the company’s largest engineering groups, and thousands of people.


“Cprime was there to help the company find the best approaches to solve its problems and act as a sounding board to help build the internal capability to enable its teams long term.” — Dan Weikart, Cprime Director & Enterprise Agile Coach

“The agile transformation addresses the organization’s cultural mindset and processes,” explains Anthony Crain, Cprime Business Agility Coach. “The Jira Cloud migration and technical tooling transformation provide a standardized platform for the teams to break down the work, identify strengths and weaknesses, and give management insight into exactly what the teams are doing to achieve the company’s desired business outcomes.”

Enabling Cultural Change with the PRIME Approach
The network communications provider turned to Cprime to enable the multi-faceted transformation. It was a decision driven by over a decade of experience working with Cprime as a partner for change within the organization.

“Cprime’s method, PRIME—Prepare, Roadmap, Iterate, Measure, Enable— aligned perfectly with the company’s goals,” says Kosco. “We formed a collaboration infrastructure where the Cprime coaches and cross-functional teams provided the resources to help the company implement a common agile taxonomy. In practical terms, Cprime was there to help them find the best approaches to solve problems, and to act as a sounding board to help them build the internal capability to enable their teams long term.”

Creating a Template for Agile Unity
Using the PRIME approach, Cprime prepared for the agile transformation by meeting with the company leaders to establish a blueprint for forming and educating teams and teams of teams within the organization. With an approved roadmap in place, Cprime began coaching teams on how to execute a new way of working using the new Jira Cloud tools.

“As coaches, Cprime engaged with the leaders and the teams, acting as a translation layer between theory and practice,” says Weikart. “We presented the new ways of working in a consistent, practical fashion that rolled up across the organization.”

Besides traditional instructor-led, role-based workshops, Cprime worked with the company to create 27 Learning Bytes—short guides that reinforce context-specific agile principles and practices. Another eight Agile Primers provide detailed, always-available references that clarify core agile roles and processes. Over 18 months, Cprime’s on-the-ground coaching team expanded from 3 to over 30 members.


“Because of the combined agile and tooling initiatives, positive change is visible everywhere. We delivered growth in earnings, revenue, and each of our key transformation metrics.” — Executive Sponsor

A Technical Jira Cloud Migration to Support a New Agile Methodology
Parallel to the coaches propagating the company’s new agile methodology, the Cprime Customer Success team worked to establish a Jira Cloud environment to centralize reporting and portfolio management, and to foster further alignment.

Leveraging their expertise as an Atlassian Platinum Solution Partner, the Cprime Customer Success team worked to onboard the provider’s teams to its new Jira Cloud infrastructure. This included overseeing a complex data migration from disparate on-site Jira instances.

“In many cases, the Jira data was already there,” says Parish. “But it wasn’t a simple matter of just lifting and shifting the data to the cloud. They were bringing together all their different tools and migrating them into Jira Align.”

Collaborating for Optimal Outcomes
To ensure a successful migration, the multi-disciplinary Cprime team coordinated across time zones to maintain the integrity of the migrated data. The entire process required constant cooperation between the networking provider and the Cprime Customer Success team.

“Not only was Cprime migrating live data, we had to make sure we weren’t stepping on anyone’s toes as they used the system. They had many scrum and kanban boards in production that contained broken workflow validators and other issues. Those needed to be addressed before migration,” says Parish. “To accommodate their data in the cloud, we had to create customizations and methodically massage the live data to avoid duplications. Post migration, clean-up involved working hand-in-hand with the client to reconcile and map the new data meaningfully.”

Working together and communicating internally, the different Cprime teams could avoid issues common to projects involving multiple vendors.

Results: Unprecedented Levels of Visibility, Traceability, and Communication
By overseeing both the migration and the agile transformation, Cprime was in an ideal position to ensure the networking communications provider’s new Jira Cloud infrastructure aligned with its goals and the updated development framework. The combined results have given the company an unprecedented view into its workflows and allowed them to make new strategic connections.

“The insights and synergy the company gained by combining both the tooling transformation and on-the-ground agile coaching provided an exponential return on their investment,” says Parish. “By blending the perspectives, Cprime has helped them see their data in new ways and align more effectively with their other efforts to achieve new levels of visibility and traceability.”

Quantifying Rapid Cultural Change
Using the new tooling and agile methodology, the network communications provider successfully launched over 400 well-formed agile teams—roughly 2,800 Cisco employees—in a single quarter. 90% of those teams aligned their long-standing backlogs with management’s newly formed strategic themes. To assist the transformation, Cprime coaches led 18 role-specific training sessions, training 525 people in under six months. This enabled the company to pursue other internal training initiatives. Overall, Cprime significantly accelerated the company’s ability to deploy a new way of working across its teams.

“They had a highly fractured working environment,” says Weikart. “Now, they have a unified but flexible working environment where everyone speaks the same language, sees consistent information, and is on a path that suits their specific context.”

Increasing Throughput and Accelerating Delivery Schedules and Response Times
With improved collaboration and transparency, the company has also seen an increase in throughput across multiple product lines, accelerated delivery schedules, and improved response times to customer support inquiries. It is continuing to work with Cprime to further transform the organization.

“Because of the combined agile and tooling initiatives, positive change is visible everywhere,” remarks an executive sponsor. “We delivered growth in earnings, revenue, and each of our key transformation metrics. We have even raised our outlook for the next fiscal year because of our healthy backlog and the steps we have taken to improve.”













Case Study #3

Company Details
Industry: Telecommunications, Technical Manufacturing
Company Size: 164,000 (excluding contractors)
Location: Silicon Valley, California
Products: Consumer Electronics, Computer Software, and Online Services
Cprime Services:
Bespoke Training
Expert Coaching Services
Technical Curriculum Design
Executive Summary
Looking to improve its internal mechanism for upskilling its workforce in the face of a global technology talent shortage, this international tech leader turned to Cprime to help it extend its training curriculum. Cprime received positive feedback from the students and impressed the company leadership with their results.

The Client
This global technology leader builds popular consumer electronics devices like smartphones, computers, tablets, and wearable accessories, as well as software, productivity, and entertainment products. They have developed a reputation for innovation and a sleek design ethos that have made them an international household name.

The Challenge: Upskilling from Within — Creating New Career Opportunities in an Established Workforce
In response to a growing global shortage of technical talent and high attrition rates, this client looked inward to address some of its technical staffing needs.

“The rationale is simple—there’s a very competitive hiring landscape for specific roles in the technology workforce economy,” explains Chris Knotts, a Director in the Cprime Learning Practice. “As a result, the device manufacturer wanted to cultivate talent from within their own ranks. Selecting and promoting people already familiar with their culture not only improves employee retention over the long term, it is also more cost effective.”

It was not an idea new to the organization. The company already had a mechanism in place to recruit and upskill employees, but the program had a limited scope and capacity. The device manufacturer wanted to expand its internal retraining capabilities to include two emergent high-demand subject areas—Quality Assurance (QA) and Enterprise Program Management (EPM).

The fundamental challenge for the company, however, wasn’t a lack of expertise, it was a lack of bandwidth.

“They knew exactly what they wanted to do, they just needed help with the execution. They wanted someone to overcome the hurdles that prevented them from doing it themselves,” says Knott. “They needed external muscle to come in and perform the administration, needs assessment, and training design and then get in there and do the actual coaching.”

To achieve that within a limited timeframe, the company required an experienced training partner with established expertise and an inventory of relevant course materials. While they expected a customized training experience tailored to their needs, they did not want to begin from scratch.

Solution: Cprime—a Multi-Disciplined Team with the Right Educational Assets
Based on previous success working together to fulfill its Atlassian tooling needs, the manufacturer shortlisted Cprime as a candidate in its request for proposal (RFP) call. Cprime won the bid on the strength of its expansive subject expertise and proven track record.

“Cprime met all their personnel and asset requirements,” says Knotts. “We had the experience and instructors, and our learning catalog contained the exact course materials that they wanted us to design.”

The Cprime team began the course design phase by sitting down with the management and supervisory teams to further sharpen requirements and clarify expectations. Cprime then collaborated with the company over the course of two months to develop and deliver multiple iterations of the training.


“They knew exactly what they wanted to do, they just needed help with the execution, someone to overcome the hurdles preventing them from doing it themselves. They wanted skilled external muscle to come in and perform the administration, needs assessment, and training design and then get in there and do the actual coaching.” — Chris Knotts, Director, Cprime Learning Practice

Rapidly Iterating to Meet Client Requirements
Each of the iterations involved further defining the course design and objectives, selecting and refining course content, and creating assessment criteria to determine successful learning outcomes. A multi-disciplined Cprime team of nine people provided input to ensure the courses reflected the most up-to-date industry best practices. Leadership and subject experts from the device manufacturer’s internal talent development team provided regular input to maintain alignment between Cprime’s output and the company’s culture and ways of working.

“We worked directly with their QA and EPM stakeholders, embedding with the functional heads of the teams that we would train, so they could inject their input right from the beginning,” says Knotts. “We ended up with the Quality Assurance and Enterprise Project Management learning tracks based on Cprime library materials but entirely unique to the device manufacturer’s needs.”

The resulting course materials combined core Cprime course content with practical use cases that helped students relate them to real-world situations and expanded their understanding of how the principles fit the manufacturer’s greater project environment.

An experienced Cprime enterprise technology coach then delivered each session, beginning with core concepts and shifting into on-the-job mentorship, demonstrating key competencies on the job.

“The Cprime technology coaches got deeply involved with the teams, fostering the practical application of the software testing they were teaching,” says Knotts. “It wasn’t a matter of spoon-feeding them a lecture, It was very hands-on.”


“We worked directly with their Quality Assurance and Enterprise Program Management stakeholders — embedding with the functional heads of the teams that we would train — so they could include their input right from the beginning.” — Chris Knotts, Director, Cprime Learning Practice

Results: Off-the-shelf Training Content Combined With Custom Coach Delivery
With only two months to prepare, Cprime delivered two intensive, ten-day training sessions. The coaches began training the first cohorts of the device manufacturer’s internal promotion candidates on the new learning tracks in month three.

The Cprime trainers then oversaw concurrent online and localized training sessions at the client’s main California campus, training over 70 people across five cohorts.

Despite the very intensive preparation, planning, and tight timeframes, Cprime received positive feedback from the students and impressed the company leadership with their results.

“Our emphasis on the hands-on, real-world coaching component enhanced what could have easily been dry, theoretical training sessions has been really meaningful for the students,” says Knotts. “Both the students and the stakeholders really liked what we were doing and how we did it.”

Because of early successes with the pilot, the device manufacturer is already looking toward a continued partnership.

“They invited Cprime to plan a second set of sessions,” says Knotts. “They knew exactly what they needed and their standards were high. Because the project was under such heavy scrutiny, It’s been really satisfying to exceed their expectations.”


“Cprime’s emphasis on hands-on, real-world coaching component into what could have been dry, theoretical, training sessions has been really meaningful for the students. Both the students and the stakeholders really liked what we were doing and how we did it.” — Chris Knotts, Director, Cprime Learning Practice













Case Study #4

Company Details
Industry: Supply Chain Automation, Material Handling, Warehouse Management, Logistics, Software & IT, and Consulting Services
Company Size: 6,000+ FTEs
Location: United States, Europe, Asia
Products: Automated Warehouse and Supply Chain Management Systems
Cprime Services:
Expert-Led GitLab Solutions and DevOps Services
Executive Summary
An international warehouse automation specialist partners with Cprime and GitLab to streamline development processes, reduce proposal calculation times, and increase its capacity to rapidly handle customer requests. Cprime’s DevOps specialists deployed a GitLab solution that slashed turnaround times to just 2% of the baseline.

The Client
In an era of online shopping and next-day delivery, this US-based Cprime client facilitates business continuity for thousands of brands worldwide. Their complex automated storage, retrieval, warehousing, and logistics solutions improve the flow of goods, materials, and information, allowing companies to meet the ever-growing expectations of global consumers.

Industry expertise, robotics, artificial intelligence, and machine learning have made the company a global leader in materials handling and logistics. Its diverse clientele come from industries that include ecommerce, retail, food and beverage, manufacturing, and third-party logistics providers.

Challenge: Streamlining Modern Warehouse Design Pipelines to Enhance Pre-Sales Efficiency
Designing a modern automated warehousing solution is astonishingly complex. In an unoptimized environment, the sheer number of factors and volume of calculations required to create a design prototype for a new logistics facility can take weeks.

“A modern warehouse is essentially a collection of robots. It’s all spectacularly complicated,” explains Kevin Ryan, Cprime Head of DevOps, EMEA. “The scope, size, and throughput of modern warehouses, and the number of unique products in any given warehouse have grown beyond our human ability to calculate. Even machines struggle to crunch the numbers efficiently.”

While lengthy design calculation times were the company’s primary pain point, system complexity also resulted in an inability to react rapidly to change. Any updates to a customer’s operating parameters or facility specification would further delay pre-sales project modeling; the company had to recalculate each time-consuming potential design from scratch. The delays ranged from hours to weeks.

“If customers can’t get answers from us quickly, the dialogue stalls and the entire process can grind to a halt. We wanted to change that,” says one of the project’s executive sponsors.

“They were seeing new projects and revenues delayed by up to a quarter as they waited for a mathematical model. There was a potential cost of millions for each delay,” says Ryan. “The company needed a development framework that would allow them to put a pre-sales mathematical model of a warehouse in front of a customer faster, which meant boosting efficiency.”

To complicate matters, any development framework the company adopted had to be a good fit with Azure Batch, the cloud platform providing the computing power to manage the calculations. The company also needed an implementation partner that could work closely with the cloud specialists on-site to modernize, scale, and streamline its infrastructure to meet the growing demand of the world’s largest retailers and manufacturers. 

Solution: Leveraging the GitLab Toolchain with Cprime Expert DevOps Services
Evaluating its options, the automated warehouse designer selected GitLab to provide the backbone for its new continuous integration and continuous development (CI/CD) initiative. Recognized for being robust, reliable, and secure, GitLab was the ideal CI/CD, collaboration, issue tracking, quality automation analysis, and code review tool. The GitLab toolchain contained everything the company needed to speed up development and enhance their predictive modeling sales tools and in-production logistics engines.

To implement the solution, GitLab recommended the Expert-Led GitLab Solutions and DevOps Services of Cprime, their Certified Training Partner.

“The Cprime DevOps team has invested heavily in GitLab professional services engineer certifications covering everything from CI/CD, project management, DevOps, and inner sourcing, to security and system admin,” explains Ryan. “But the requirements for this engagement went beyond professional GitLab implementation services. The company hired Cprime to show them how to take the GitLab toolchain and achieve elite DevOps CI/CD performance.” 


“The requirements for this engagement went beyond professional GitLab implementation services. The company hired Cprime to show them how to take the GitLab toolchain and achieve elite DevOps CI/CD performance.” — Kevin Ryan, Cprime Head of DevOps, EMEA

Discovering Context and Objectives Using Spikes
The two-person Cprime team began Discovery to define the company’s context and objectives clearly. They started by creating research tasks to identify and resolve questions and explore potential solutions.

“By creating technical spikes, we formed an understanding of their codebase and what they needed to achieve,” says Ryan. “Using those prototypes, we rapidly gathered feedback and verified we were on the right track.”

Tailoring Toolsets and Processes for the Azure Environment
After achieving consensus with the company’s management and DevOps teams, the Cprime team tailored the new GitLab instance to work specifically within the customer’s Microsoft Azure environment and security context.

“We created secure containers, CI/CD pipelines, and process templates,” says Ryan. “The result was a universal base implementation they could reuse across multiple projects to speed up development long term.”

Infrastructure as Code With Helm and Terraform
To ensure a consistent, easily deployed development environment, the Cprime team also worked with the company to leverage GitLab CI/CD’s native Terraform integration. Using the Terraform Helm provider allowed the company to begin centrally deploying Helm charts. This allowed it to manage high- and low-level Azure Kubernetes components, easily implement and modify Infrastructure-as-Code (IaC) workflows, and simplify the creation of common and complex infrastructure patterns.

Throughout the process, Cprime worked to bridge the gaps, coordinating and driving innovation between company stakeholders, DevOps teams, and third-party Azure infrastructure architects.

“As implementation specialists, Cprime took the work of all the teams, rationalized it, and worked as the engine that put it into production,” says Ryan. “It was all about streamlining collaboration and automating the processes to speed up development.”


“As implementation specialists, Cprime took the output of all the teams, rationalized it, and put it into production using GitLab. It was all about streamlining collaboration and automating processes to accelerate development.” — Kevin Ryan, Cprime Head of DevOps, EMEA

Results: Increased Deployment Frequency and Reduced Error Rates 
Because of the combined efforts of Cprime and the project teams, the warehouse design company established high levels of process maturity based on DevOps Research and Assessment (DORA) core metrics. Across the board, the company’s deployment frequency increased while it slashed its change lead times, change failure rates, and mean error recovery times.

Cumulative Change Dramatically Reduces Turnaround Times
As an indicator of the efficacy of the cumulative changes, the company reduced simulation times from over 11 hours to as few as 24 minutes. Turnarounds on proposal submissions showed similarly dramatic improvements.

“We’ve reduced the time to solution—from receiving customer data to running designs and calculations and ultimately giving out a warehouse proposal—from eight weeks down to one day,” the executive sponsor states. “The productivity increase has scaled our capacity to answer RFQs and engage with new and existing customers.”

Likewise, by using GitLab project templates, Terraform, and Helm scripts to automate their CI/CD pipeline, the company’s development team recently set a new turnaround record—they received a new specification and deployed the corrected warehouse design in only 90 minutes.


“We’ve reduced the time to solution—from having customer data to running designs and calculations and ultimately giving out a warehouse proposal—from eight weeks down to one day. The productivity increase has scaled our capacity to answer RFQs and engage with new and existing customers.” — Executive Sponsor

Getting There With Cprime
During the engagement, Cprime exceeded the client’s expectations for GitLab professional engineering services. Based on Cprime’s performance and the clear successes of phase one, the company has extended the relationship indefinitely.

“We started with a very short engagement and, based on our performance, over a year later we support all their GitLab and Azure-related activities,” says Ryan. “The company learned what I want all potential Cprime customers to understand: if you want to become a high-performing, elite development organization, Cprime will get you there.”















Case Study #5

Company Details
Industry: Aerospace Exploration and Research
Company Size: 50 employees (10 engineers and supporting technical staff)
Location: Netherlands
Products: Autonomous Lunar Exploration Vehicle
Cprime Services:
CI/CD
GitLab Solutions Implementation
GitLab Training
Executive Summary
Lacking a modern proactive testing process for the low-level firmware and embedded systems in its moon rover, a team of university engineers turned to Cprime to implement a CI/CD testing pipeline that reduces trial-and-error development by 75%.

The Client
When a prestigious European technical university set out to build a moon robot, one of its goals was to highlight the potential of its new generation of engineers. Using a fresh student perspective, the institution sought to create a semi-autonomous rover that could move freely about the moon’s surface while collecting important information about radiation levels.

Unlike previous remote moon exploration vehicles, however, the university’s initiative focused on creating a smaller, more lightweight system. The new rover would have a form factor that scientists could easily convey into space and deploy as a swarm to gather data across a vast surface area. The rover’s affordability, autonomy, and improved mobility would allow exploration teams to undertake missions across terrain impractical for larger, heavier, and more expensive self-driving vehicles.

Challenge: Breaking New Ground — Creating a Modern CI/CD Testing Platform for the Aerospace Industry
Software development is often a process of trial and error, and developing hardware, software, and firmware systems for off-planet exploration exponentially increases the potential risk of something going wrong. Due to the narrow margins for error in space, the rover project team of 50 student engineers and support staff wanted a modern, proactive testing and development process to increase their chances of developing a robust, reliable lunar vehicle.

“Having your code break on the moon is obviously a massive problem. It’s not something that you can fix by hitting a button and rebooting the system,” says Kevin Ryan, Agile and DevOps Coach for Cprime EMEA. “The problem was that embedded system workflows, especially in the aerospace and space industries, are decades behind the processes used to develop modern cloud-based industrial infrastructures. Not that the students lacked skills—there was a lack of precedent in the entire industry. Cprime’s role was to help them establish that precedent and significantly reduce marginal risks.”


“Having your code break on the moon is obviously a massive problem. It’s not something that you can fix by hitting a button and rebooting the system.” — Kevin Ryan, Agile and DevOps Coach for Cprime EMEA

Aligning processes with modern cloud methodologies
To improve their quality control protocols, the university team needed to align their processes with contemporary cloud methodologies and software development best practices. That meant implementing the tooling and ways of working for a CI/CD (continuous integration, continuous deployment) pipeline. The testing pipeline would allow them to rapidly iterate upon their code and design while maintaining quality and continuity across the project.

“As a team, they focused on writing complex, embedded machine learning and AI code. Coming directly from academia, they weren’t up to speed on code development automation infrastructures,” says Ryan. “Industrialized development just wasn’t a part of their scope.”

Solution: Partnering with Cprime to Evaluate Tools and Create New Development Opportunities
Based on a recommendation from one of their commercial partners, the university team turned to Cprime, GitLab Certified Training Partners. The initial brief was simple, but left room for expansion.

“They had chosen GitLab—a complete DevOps platform—but they wanted Cprime to show them what using it should look like,” says Ryan. “They needed to understand the fundamental building blocks. We began by implementing the development environment and went from there as they learned the tool’s potential applications and use cases.”

The Cprime trainers experienced a learning curve nearly as steep as the student engineers themselves. The project was more than a simple tooling upgrade or transformation. The Cprime team needed to dive deep to define the project’s practical requirements and apply their newfound knowledge to a viable solution.

“Due to the unfamiliar environment, it has been a little like a research project—an incremental process to figure out how their DevOps journey should work,” says Ryan. “There was no Googling for a quick solution. As trainers, we needed to understand what they do before we could even hope to make reasonable and intelligent proposals to move them forward.”

A single repository of distinct projects with clear relationships
After clarifying the engineering team’s requirements, Cprime began putting together the components for a successful CI/CD pipeline. The team adapted course materials and explored key principles—from classes like GitLab with Git Basics and GitLab for CI/CD Pipelines—with the engineers to help them create an elite DevOps toolchain to solve their testing issues.

“We began by advocating for a mono repo rather than a poly repo approach to mitigate complexity and aid communication. Then we developed systems for quality assurance, build, and testing automation. We also automated dependency management and documentation generation,” says Ryan. “Once they were comfortable with the basic processes, we moved into more hardcore QA tools like Google Test, the C++ testing and mocking framework. Now, they are doing some groundbreaking stuff and actually deploying machine-level firmware to their space robot.”


“Together we have put together a toolchain that ensures they check, double check, and triple check every one and zero in their code base. It has pushed the project forward and allowed them to increase their benchmarks while simplifying each subsequent success.” — Kevin Ryan, Agile and DevOps Coach for Cprime EMEA

The right tools for success
To reduce context switching and promote a more familiar, consistent development and testing environment, Cprime also introduced the GitLab Workflow extension for Visual Studio (VS).

“Using modern technologies like Docker and VS development containers has made a huge difference,” says Ryan. “Because each machine you compile code on can yield a different result, just having an identical environment for everyone with all the dependencies, tooling, and  build infrastructure in place has improved auditability and repeatability.”

Results: Increased Quality and Reduced Margins for Error
After 18 months of working with Cprime, the university teams have a unique CI/CD pipeline suitable for the aerospace industry and low-level firmware and embedded systems development. It is a development and testing framework that rivals any cutting-edge development and testing automation infrastructure for the cloud.

By guiding them toward a uniform development ecosystem with repeatable processes, Cprime helped the engineering team eliminate nearly 75% of the trial and error caused by compiling and testing code on inconsistent systems.

“That translates directly into higher quality firmware and software, and a reduced margin for error,” says Ryan. “We have put together a toolchain that ensures they check, double check, and triple check every one and zero in their code base. It has pushed the project forward and allowed them to increase their benchmarks while simplifying each subsequent success.”













Case Study #6

Atlassian Cloud Migration Case Study – Business Value Derived by Georgia United Credit Union
 

About Georgia United Credit Union (GUCU)
Georgia United is one of the largest and strongest credit unions in Georgia. They serve over 150,000 members with innovative digital banking solutions, full-service branches, and 100,000 surcharge-free ATMs across the globe. They provide “banking experiences that allow you to live your best life.”

The Challenge
Georgia United Credit Union (GUCU) had resource constraints and limited experience in migrating Atlassian applications from Server to the Atlassian Cloud. The complexity of their Jira Service Management instances and related integrations made it critical that the migration was executed meticulously. Additionally, being a nationally regulated financial firm, many security protocols had to be adhered to and met from end to end.

The Solution
Migrating to Atlassian Cloud would allow Georgia United Credit Union to deprecate their existing infrastructure and mitigate the related security risks and concerns. Additional cost savings would be realized, as there would be no infrastructure or support costs in Atlassian Cloud.

The Benefits
Financial Impact
GUCU realized significant TCO reduction by going to Atlassian Cloud. As a result of the migration, on-prem infrastructure was decommissioned, and the engineers supporting it were freed up to do other high-value activities.

Security Risks
Security concerns have been alleviated by migrating to Atlassian Cloud; there are no longer any outages to patch operating systems and remediated CVE vulnerabilities, keeping the company and its data more secure.

Latest & Greatest
Once in Atlassian Cloud, all upgrades happen behind the scenes with no need for GUCU to involve technical resources to plan and perform the upgrades, or coordinate the downtime with the rest of the company.

About Cprime and AWS
Cprime is a strategic consulting company specializing in Agile and DevOps transformations. Cprime holds the following partnerships—SAFe® Gold Partner (Agile), Atlassian Platinum Partner (DevOps), and AWS Advanced Tier Consulting Partner (Cloud)—a claim no other firm in the world can make.

Cprime participates in the AWS ISV Workload Migration Program, AWS Solution Provider Program, and AWS Well-Architected Partner Program. In addition, Cprime has achieved its AWS DevOps Competency and is pursuing a Migration Competency, while actively delivering services to customers.














Case Study #7

Company Details
Industry: Life Sciences, Pharmaceutical
Company Size: Over 90,000 employees
Location: London, England, UK; offices worldwide
Products: Medications, vaccines
Cprime Services:
SAFe Transformation and Coaching
Training
Agilt Staffing - RTE

Executive Summary
One of the company’s software development teams had been exploring better ways of working for some time in conjunction with a massive tooling project—moving from legacy applications to a newer SaaS Planning/Materials/Distribution (PMD) solution for managing clinical trials. The effort was slow to progress and ran into some challenges that prompted reaching out to Cprime for coaching and transformational consultation. Measurable improvements in velocity and efficiency, beneficial cultural change, and enhanced value delivery have been the result.


  
The Challenge: Attempting a Transformation Within a Transformation 
A digital or Agile transformation is always going to be a long and challenging effort, especially at the enterprise level. This company has been pursuing a large-scale digital transformation for years now, which causes change at all levels. Amidst this change, they tasked the development team with undertaking a huge tooling project and, to accomplish that, an Agile transformation of their own. 

Migrating to a new SaaS platform
The coordination and management of clinical drug trials involves a lot of moving parts, and the cost of mismanagement can be very high. The team had relied on custom applications for many years to support this process. But, considering the advancements made in the tools available, and the cost of keeping up an aging infrastructure, the organization decided in 2018 to invest in a new cloud-based SaaS solution for the PMD functions. 

The development team’s Director and Product Owner explains, “While it sounds logical to think moving to a SaaS solution would mean everything is simplified and made easier, the reality is quite different. There’s a tremendous amount of data involved and several key integrations that need to be duplicated, migrated, or reconfigured.”

And, of course, work can’t be put on hold for the duration of this process, so all of that work needs to be done while both tools and all integrations are live and the data is constantly changing. 

“I equate it to jumping onto a moving bus,” he says.

Pursuing scaled Agility
After joining the team as Product Owner in 2019, the Director became responsible for delivery, engineering, and product management, in addition to the tooling migration. With the resources available, the only practical way to get a handle on the workload was to double down on the scaled Agile transformation the team had already begun.

“We were technically ‘doing Agile’,” he says, “but there was a lot of room for improvement. Specifically, we needed to get better organized and consistent around processes, roles, and expectations.” 

He took an important step by working to get Agile Facilitators (Scrum Masters) installed in the four existing Agile teams to add that layer of oversight and coordination. He continues, “I think bringing in the Agile Facilitators gave us better insight into where we were struggling. For example, we were moving people to the work rather than work to the people. We were heading into sprint planning without having fully refined our backlog, and then refining as the sprint progressed.”

By surfacing these gaps in their Agile practice, the team could start formulating a plan to fill them. 

Overcoming inertia
Of course, change rarely comes easily. Especially in very large organizations, inertia can be a formidable obstacle. 

Moving to new ways of working comes with a cost—financially and psychologically. “The way we’ve always done it” is not just an excuse. It’s a security blanket that protects the organization from new ideas that can sometimes be scary.

And the larger organization was already experiencing a lot of change as part of their ongoing multi-year digital transformation. So, additional change was an even harder sell. After all, the changes weren’t just tool- or process-related. They involved changes in mindset and culture. 

The Director says, “I realized quickly that we would need to create a solid plan of attack that would garner support from others in the organization if we had any hope of making changes that would stick.”

The COVID-19 pandemic  
On top of everything else, in early 2020, the global pandemic hit with its accompanying upheaval and uncertainty. The teams had to quickly learn how to work and collaborate remotely, which is not the standard for Agile teams. Over the next two years, significant staff turnover also took its toll on the team’s efforts.

Despite all this, they made progress. In June 2021, they launched the planning module on the new platform. 

“Over the eighteen months it took to achieve that goal, we learned a lot about where we were and where we needed to be,” he says. “The key takeaway to me was that if we wanted to continue to progress, we needed help.”

That’s when Scott Seivwright, Executive Agile Coach with Cprime, began consulting with the team.

The Solution: A More Formalized Approach to Scaled Agility and Expert Guidance
Scott recalls, “When the Director and I first spoke, I could see that a lot of the pieces were there, but that they were missing structure and consistency.”

To address this issue, Scott recommended the Scaled Agile Framework® (SAFe®) as a template from which the team could build a structured combination of roles, ceremonies, artifacts, and processes to formalize and systematize their Agile practice.

(SAFe and Scaled Agile Framework are registered trademarks of Scaled Agile, Inc.)

To test the validity of this plan, they pursued a pilot program in the UK. The Cprime team resourced Agile professionals who could take on vital roles in the SAFe transformation. They also liaised with external suppliers and internal teams to coordinate the software delivery, data systems, and integrations that would link the existing stack with new APIs and platform solutions.

Then, in March 2021, the teams headed into the core SAFe ceremony, the quarterly PI planning session.

Big-room PI planning
Optimally, PI planning is an opportunity for all stakeholders connected to the Agile Release Train (ART)—the SAFe designation for a “team of Agile teams”—to meet together, in person, to discuss the next six sprints’ worth of work. Of course, with the pandemic still affecting many areas, getting everyone together wasn’t possible.

The Director recalls, “Although we had to make do with a mostly virtual PI planning event, I think it was a huge step forward for us. It was the first time we could get the right people together all at once from both the business and tech sides to discuss what we needed to do, what stood in our way, and how to address those issues. It fostered communication and collaboration that we vitally needed.”

The event spotlighted more areas for improvement as well, which informed future planning events and the Cprime team’s strategies.

“At the time,” Scott says, “the clinical trial program was running at an overall efficiency rate of about 48 percent. In other words, a little less than half of the drugs being sent out in support of various clinical trials were actually reaching the right person at the right time to produce valid, timely results. So, in order to avoid invalidating the tests, the company was spending about twice what they should have been to cover for inefficiencies and waste in the process. This was our starting point.”

Bringing in an Agile Coach to serve as RTE
The next step in the process was for Scott to bring in Brandon Hill-Jowett, Cprime Agile Coach and Release Train Engineer (RTE). The Release Train is the SAFe designation for the coordinated effort required for a team of Agile teams to accomplish the work planned for each planning increment. It’s the RTE’s job to lead that train, remove any impediments standing in its way, and keep it speeding down the track.

“Bringing Brandon on made an immediate impact,” the Director says. “He’s given us a huge amount of energy and drive, and a clear vision of what we need to achieve. He’s a fantastic coach, and I’ve seen the increase in Agile and SAFe knowledge—both my own and in the team—and how much that’s leveled up our work.”

Brandon says, “After that initial PI event, we came away with a clearer understanding of the blockers holding the team back from taking the next step. For example, we found that estimates for the work required to accomplish a given goal were as much as 265 percent low for a variety of reasons: internal dependencies, unreliable systems, scope variance, delays from outside vendors, and erroneous testing cycle times. Now that we’d set up a dialogue with the business side, those explanations went a long way toward justifying the need for change.”

Brandon worked with the Director and other stakeholders to identify systemic problems that could be rectified through incremental change and a focus on continuous improvement. They set up SAFe ceremonies on a regular cadence to support collaboration and fuel regular progress. They also created an Executive Action Committee (EAC) that meets regularly to discuss and rectify dependencies and blockers on the business side, make decisions to guide the team’s strategy, and keep the rest of the organization informed.

“We created cross-functional teams during the final PI of 2022,” Brandon says, “and we’re now working on optimizing the ART so we can keep this momentum going.”

The Results: The Team Sees Both Measurable and Unmeasurable Affects in Short Order
The results of these efforts have been nothing short of fantastic.

Massive improvements in productivity
Brandon reports, “We’ve seen predictability rise from 45 percent to 80 percent, which means our planning is becoming far more accurate and work is getting done consistently. Since establishing cross-functional teams, we’ve seen velocity double, meaning twice as much is getting accomplished each sprint.”

The Director agrees, “Our technical capabilities and engineering function have gotten much stronger. By improving our ability to quickly and efficiently update and develop our systems, we’re able to get working software in the hands of the user faster. Then, we get feedback faster and can turn that into further improvements. So, we’re delivering more value to our customers, faster than ever.”

Brandon continues, “Mapping out the previous processes, we calculated an average release time of 548 days (about 18 months). We forecast that the efficiencies we’ve proposed will reduce that release cycle by 73 percent to just 149 days (about five months). Overall, we forecast we will increase that 48 percent efficiency up to 80 percent, saving the company billions of pounds annually.”

A better culture to support a better way of working
Some of the benefits are less tangible, but no less important.

“I’m seeing marked changes in the culture and attitudes of those in and around this team,” the Director says. “There’s greater psychological safety and trust. We’re working together more effectively, both within the tech department and with the business side. In this kind of environment, it’s becoming easier to ask the right questions, entertain innovative ideas, and collaborate freely because we’re working toward common goals.”

He concludes, “In the end, our goal is to help more people with the life-saving and life-changing drugs the company develops. Every step we take to improve our piece of that puzzle means we’re achieving that goal.”













Case Study #8

Company Details
Industry: Cosmetics manufacturing and retail
Company Size: 62,000 employees
Location: New York City (USA), with facilities worldwide
Products: Cosmetics, Beauty, and Lifestyle
Cprime Services:
Agile Coaching
Agile Transformation
Executive Summary
Faced with information silos between its international offices and a sprawling collection of over 350 unstandardized, underperforming, and difficult-to-manage brand and regional ecommerce websites, this major luxury cosmetics manufacturer turned to Cprime to align its international offices and improve its online sales performance.


  
The Client
This Cprime client is an internationally recognized global cosmetics and beauty manufacturer. Founded over 70 years ago, the company is notable for its transformation of the industry, especially in how they market accessible cosmetics with luxury appeal.

Today, the beauty product manufacturer is globally ubiquitous—it is currently the home of over 30 instantly recognizable brands synonymous with quality and affordable extravagance.

The company’s success has translated into a public valuation of over 90 billion USD with annual sales revenues of nearly $18 billion from business operations in over 150 countries.

Challenge: Aligning International E-commerce Websites Across Multiple Brands, Regions, and Cultures
Known for its traditional brick-and-mortar sales success, the company has also seen significant results because of its increased focus on online retail and e-commerce channels. But, despite doubling online revenue during the COVID-19 pandemic, the beauty brand was leaving money on the table, especially during the critical holiday season that represents most of the cosmetics and lifestyle industry’s annual sales.

Complexity of Scale
The manufacturer’s key issue was maintaining consistency and functionality across a vast number of corporate and international websites. Each of the company’s over 30 brands operated multiple semi-autonomous regional websites, each with localized content and requirements. Everything from brand messaging to site performance, content delivery, payment collection, and product fulfillment across the sites was difficult to maintain, inconsistent, and underperforming.

“It is the most complicated company I’ve come across,” explains Jennifer Vasi, Cprime Agile Coach and Certified Scaled Agile Framework® Program Consultant (SPC), and Release Train Engineer. “Its online, brand, and global and regional aspects all have to come together. From a scaling perspective, that is incredibly advanced. The company has over 300 different websites—think 30+ brands, each with 10+ regions. Each website has a different brand experience and each checkout section follows specific regional requirements.”

The Costs of Inconsistency
Poor user experience was causing shopping cart abandonments and driving customers to competitors with more stable, streamlined, user-friendly ecommerce portals.

“They were behind the curve,” says Denise Joseph, Agile Coach and Certified Scaled Agile Framework® Program Consultant (SPCT). “When site performance dipped, consumers would simply head over to another online vendor for a better shopping experience.”

Another pain point was that the levels of technical maturity in the organization varied widely—while some sites were updated with modern development technologies, others ran slow and deeply complex legacy code.

“The sites for newer brands were usually very advanced and on the most current development platforms. Other, more established brands were running code up to a decade old,” says Bridget O’Brien, Cprime Agile Coach and SPC.

A Global Disconnect
The next issue was the disconnect between the regional and corporate teams with product placement, promotional efforts, and site feature development. They often failed to leverage valuable regional knowledge. In terms of feature development, the different localities and international teams were working at cross purposes, duplicating costly development efforts instead of coordinating to develop new components the company could reuse across all locations. Despite local advice, management was also investing in initiatives unsuitable to specific regions.

“The company needed to eliminate its autonomous websites, build a modern, universal ecommerce platform, and establish processes for effective inter-regional communications,” says Liza Ridgway, Cprime’s Head of North America Sales. “They needed to eliminate redundancy, errors, and duplicated effort.”

“The client’s primary goal was prioritization—they wanted to create a very focused roadmap that included modernizing the platform,” adds O’Brien. “They wanted to get the entire organization moving in the same direction.”

Solution: Partnering with Cprime for Incremental Change
Aware of the changes required and the complexity of all its moving parts around the globe, the manufacturer’s ecommerce arm reached out to Cprime. The request for help was based on the two companies’ successes working together on a previous transformation.

“Rather than trying to boil the ocean, they recognized they needed somebody to guide them incrementally through this complex transformation,” says Vasi. “Cprime had helped them before and we were familiar with the organization’s people and culture.”

Improving Portfolios, Empowering Teams, and Aligning Objectives
Operating at the portfolio and team levels, the Cprime consultants approached the manufacturers’ requirements using the same methodologies they were engaged to promote.

“At the portfolio level we began with a basic transformation to empower management to recognize value streams and select and group project teams,” says Joseph. “We led the transformation using the Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe®), eventually adopting a more supportive role and offering coaching to support the company’s new ways of working and help management align around its objectives and the key results it sought.”

As a part of this process, the Cprime coaches helped the company visualize the data they had in Jira, establish their development programs, and effectively plan using the Atlassian toolset to achieve their goal of becoming more predictable. Throughout the engagement, the Cprime team adapted its approach to meet the manufacturer’s requirements.

“Our team size fluctuated. Our coaching team numbered around five people, but we often took on player-coaches in specific roles to fill in the gaps,” says O’Brien. “When they needed release train engineers, for example, someone from Cprime would take on those responsibilities and advise and help until their teams had the knowledge for independent success.”

 

“The company needed to eliminate its autonomous websites, build a modern, universal ecommerce platform, and establish processes for effective inter-regional communications.” – Liza Ridgway, Cprime’s Head of North America Sales
 

Prioritizing Communication to Achieve Desired Business Results
At the team level, Cprime followed a similar path, prioritizing removing the communication silos between the brand and its regional partners to develop a standardized ecommerce platform based on mutually established goals. Just as significantly, Cprime set out to open up a dialogue between the head office and the regional teams to ensure their local expertise would start being considered.

“We spent a lot of time in goals coaching and story writing with the brand and regional teams, working with them to stop their goal posts from shifting,” recalls Vasi. “It wasn’t about affecting what they were delivering. It was about streamlining how they worked and collaborated so they could become effective product teams with a view of the big picture. We focused on teaching them how to deliver value rather than simply checking off unrelated and potentially conflicting boxes in their internal ticket system.”

Results: 70% Predictability with Structured PI Planning and Improved Information Flow for All
Over the course of the engagement, the manufacturer’s ecommerce section went from almost no structured quarterly planning to running regular release trains and regional program increment (PI) planning sessions.

“With release trains and PI planning sessions in full swing, the teams aligned. Each knew what the others were working on and how their own deliverables affected the work product of their colleagues,” says Nicole Bruno, Cprime Agile Coach, Release Train Engineer, and SPC. “They had a better, more collaborative working relationship—they were no longer just throwing requests over the fence.”

Change at the Organizational Level
In a year and a half, Cprime trained hundreds of people throughout the organization, in the US, Europe, Hong Kong, APAC, and the rest of Asia. Overall, the Cprime team facilitated 13 independently held release trains, each with a minimum of 50 team members.

“As a result of the training, for three days every quarter, across the company and the world, 650 people would sit down and establish a roadmap,” says Joseph. “The entire company—management, and everyone down the line—knew exactly what to deliver for the next three months.”

Enhanced Planning and Efficiency
Besides providing the regional teams with a voice and averting expensive culturally unsuccessful initiatives, the roadmap eliminated costly duplicate work by providing the teams with the information they needed to create shared services the company could reuse in every locale. As a result of the planning, predictability rose to 70% despite turbulent pre- and post-COVID-19 market conditions.

While no transformation is ever complete, Cprime has helped place the beauty and cosmetics manufacturer on the path to future success by empowering its management and teams with the information required to plan more effectively.

“We got them to a place where they understood their deliverables, and could measure how their teams were doing. Management had clear metrics to base decisions on,” concludes Joseph. “Leadership gained confidence in what the teams were planning. The teams themselves justified that confidence by learning how to establish realistic workloads they could take on without over-committing and under-delivering.”













Case Study #9

Company Details
Industry: Life Sciences, Pharmaceutical
Company Size: Over 90,000 employees
Location: London, England, UK; offices worldwide
Products: Medications, vaccines
Cprime Services:
Agile Staffing - RTE
SAFe Transformation and Coaching
Training
Executive Summary
The life sciences leader’s R&D division had already been applying Agile principles to their workflow for some time, and had been experimenting with formally scaling their Agile practice using the Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe®) as a guideline. But they recognized there were opportunities for improvement, so to support their digital data ambition, the team reached out to Cprime for guidance to enhance and speed up their SAFe transformation. The result? A 96% predictability score on committed PI Objectives, and a host of other improvements to how work gets done.


  
The Challenge: Lack of Alignment and Planning Struggles Slowed the Agile Scaling Journey
As they progressed in their efforts to scale their Agile practice, they identified opportunities for improvement across the board, both in processes and in the underlying cultural and strategic approach they were taking to scaled agility.

Interdependent teams working in silos
“We had four delivery teams working with two products,” says the R&D department’s Product Director, “and the products are highly interdependent. The data coming out of each feed the other in a cycle. So the delivery teams worked hard on their own product backlog items (PBIs) but there really wasn’t a mechanism for keeping all four teams aligned at all times.”

Additionally, the effectiveness of planning was limited because different teams were planning independently in parallel, which often left risks and dependencies undetected until they became blockers.

Project instead of product mindset
This leading pharmaceutical manufacturer had already engaged Cprime a year earlier to provide extensive training courses around various Agile disciplines and Lean Portfolio Management (LPM). As a result of her own experience in these training classes, the Product Director recognized that the delivery teams were approaching their workflow from a project perspective rather than focusing on value streams, which is a core foundation of SAFe and LPM. To progress with their scaling journey, this would need to change. This core adjustment in what was guiding the work would require tremendous change involving many people. It was no small task.

 

“We had four delivery teams working with two products and the products are highly interdependent. The data coming out of each feed the other in a cycle. So the delivery teams worked hard on their own product backlog items (PBIs) but there really wasn’t a mechanism for keeping all four teams aligned at all times.” – R&D department’s Product Director
 

Limited understanding of the big picture
Finally, a general lack of alignment between the business and technical teams resulted in priorities and tasks being set down without the teams really understanding the bigger picture of what they were building and why. This is a situation that we see affecting nearly every organization in one form or another. While it can be a formidable challenge, the delivery teams were eager to overcome it.

The Solution: Bringing in a Release Train Engineer (RTE) to Solidify SAFe
Heading into 2022, they reached out to Cprime to source a coach and SAFe expert who could help guide the teams through the coming changes. Ryan Evans, RTE and Agile Coach, took on this challenging and exciting engagement.

An initial assessment and gap analysis
“Although I am an RTE,” Ryan says, “running the Agile Release Train (ART) wasn’t my first task. I needed to thoroughly understand where the teams were in terms of Agile maturity and workflow so I could give the ART the best chance at success.”

Ryan worked closely with the Product Director to perform a large-scale assessment of the delivery teams and processes. In the end, the assessment functioned as a gap analysis.

“I’ll never forget opening Ryan’s report,” she says, “to see forty-six items listed as opportunities for improvement. But it was great to see everything out on the table. Then, Ryan and I discussed each item and decided which were most important and would have the most impact. Then we could focus our efforts accordingly.”

Ryan adds, “While the gap analysis turned up many necessary improvements, we could boil nearly all down to a few main themes: getting all the teams unified into one ART and working on one cadence so they could plan and execute the work as a cohesive unit, and applying foundational SAFe concepts pragmatically to better organize and prioritize the work being done. So, that’s what we did.”

Changes to enhance PI Planning
Ryan began working with the teams in February 2022, five weeks before the end of the first quarter. With an eye on optimizing the Q2 PI Planning session, he focused on making changes that would get meaningful results without causing undue disruption.

“We had about five weeks to prepare for the new PI Planning,” Ryan recalls, “so it was a blur of activity. We needed to coordinate a much larger and longer session than they’d done before, and we wanted to do some preliminary training so the teams and leadership could get the most out of the event. But we completed it and ran an enhanced planning session involving all four teams, as well as subject matter experts and other stakeholders from several other business units—about one hundred attendees on three continents.”

The primary goals of these changes were:
Getting on the same page — Bringing all four teams together for a single, all-encompassing planning session
Getting on the same schedule — Establishing a unified cadence so everyone could effectively plan, deliver, and continually improve in concert
Understanding our dependencies — With the use of Mural, the teams could visualize all their dependencies and when they needed to be delivered
Determining the priority of work — Using the concept of Weighted Shortest Job First (WSJF), the teams could determine the order in which they should tackle work
Formalizing the I&P — Establishing a consistent Innovation & Planning (I&P) sprint at the end of each PI to support continuous improvement
Laying a solid foundation — This first enhanced PI planning event would set a baseline on which to measure improvement, and a blueprint for future engagements
During the event, Ryan served as RTE, the facilitator who kept the process on track and moving forward. With his coaching, the Product Owners and Agile Facilitators (Scrum Masters) helped facilitate and took the lead in their areas of responsibility.

The Product Director recalls, “Going into that Q2 planning event, I think we were all far better prepared than we’d been in the past to have meaningful conversations and make appropriate decisions. Understanding what we needed to accomplish, how to best do so, and especially why, was vital to the event’s success.”

Working the SAFe framework
Another objective Ryan and the team focused on, both before and after the enhanced Q2 PI planning event, was formalizing the teams’ use of the SAFe framework to better support their scaled Agile practice as an ART. This was another byproduct of ongoing training and slow-but-steady adjustments to existing roles and processes to better align with best practices that have proved successful in thousands of previous engagements.

“To me,” the Product Director says, “one of the greatest benefits of working with Ryan on this was his supporting our use of SAFe as a framework, not a rigid checklist of requirements. There were several concepts we agreed were necessary and beneficial changes we needed to implement, but others that we discussed and decided just weren’t right for the company at this time. And that’s ok. We could pick what would work best for our unique situation.”

The primary goals of these adjustments were:
Formalizing roles and responsibilities — Team members and leaders were trained to take on or better carry out their respective roles in a SAFe environment.
Formalizing Agile concepts — This included the definition of ready, definition of done, acceptance criteria, capacity planning, feature refinement, and prioritization via WSJF. These concepts were already in play, but teams weren’t applying them consistently, so they needed a common understanding and commitment.
Formalizing Agile ceremonies — Establishing a consistent schedule of daily, weekly, and per-sprint meetings provided stability and unity while eliminating a lot of unnecessary ad hoc meetings.
Supporting ongoing improvement — Providing necessary SAFe training to get buy-in and help everyone understand the how AND the why behind the changes, as well as ongoing assessments to first establish a baseline and then track increased maturity.
Ryan says, “There was a notable rise in the teams’ confidence level as these principles sunk in and they started seeing the real world value of adhering to a more unified and consistent way of working. Even those who were hesitant at first have really embraced the process.”

The Results: An unprecedented 96% predictability rate on top of greater transparency and trust
Two PIs further along since that first enhanced session in Q2, the team has experienced an unprecedented improvement in predictability based on committed PI Objectives completed.

“In all my years running ARTs, I’ve never seen a percentage this high,” Ryan says, referring to the 95.7 percent predictability rate of committed PI Objectives the teams achieved in the last quarter. “It’s a testament to the strides they’ve made in understanding capacity and velocity, as well as what they can legitimately commit to versus what work is less predictable because of dependencies or blockers outside their control.”

The Product Director concurs, “While that number is phenomenal, we know there’s still work we can do to increase the number of stories we’re able to commit to as we work to smooth out dependencies internally and with outside teams. But, the progress so far has been excellent.”

 

“While the gap analysis turned up many necessary improvements, we could boil nearly all down to a few main themes: getting all the teams unified into one ART and working on one cadence so they could plan and execute the work as a cohesive unit, and applying foundational SAFe concepts pragmatically to better organize and prioritize the work being done. So, that’s what we did.” -Ryan Evans, STE, Cprime RTE and Agile Coach
 

Qualitative improvements
Besides quantitative results showing dramatic improvement from baselines set in March, the teams have reported several qualitative improvements as well, including:

Greater confidence planning, committing to, and delivering work, but more importantly, greater confidence in stating when the teams cannot commit to deliver work
More transparency and visibility into the work within and outside the teams
Stronger engagement with and understanding of the big picture strategy
New-found stability to withstand inevitable change within and outside the teams
Enhanced collaboration within the development teams and with stakeholders in other departments
Greater trust that the teams will finish the work that is ready and in the queue
Additionally, in November, a fifth delivery team joined to do a Large Solution PI planning session. This showed a new level of coordination and collaboration between the teams as both continue to mature in their scaled Agile practice. As a result, the company has renewed the engagement so the progress can continue.

The Product Director concludes, “Working with Ryan has been great. We got on well from the get go, and I know that every new decision or experiment is going to be a give and take where we will do what’s best for my teams and the company as a whole.”













Case Study #10

Company Details
Industry: Manufacturing and Product Development
Company Size: 800 employees
Location: San Mateo, CA (with additional offices worldwide)
Products: Cameras, Camera Accessories
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Confluence Implementation and Customization
Atlassian Jira Implementation and Customization
Cloud Data Migration
Executive Summary
Dissatisfied with poor performance and support from its legacy Jira and Confluence hosting vendor, this pioneering camera manufacturer took back control of its data by engaging Cprime to migrate its Atlassian tooling into the cloud, with impressive results.


  
The Client
Established in 2002 by sports enthusiasts wanting a rugged, compact, and easy-to-use method of capturing high-quality video in extreme environments, this Cprime client sets the gold standard in the industry.

Today, the market has grown to $3 billion, and this company has captured one-third of global sales — over $1 billion in both 2021 and 2022.

The Challenge: Improving Poor Application Performance and Overcoming Sluggish Vendor Support on a Tight Timeline
Action cameras occupy an extremely competitive market expected to reach over $7 billion before 2030. This rapid revenue growth is due to the professional and consumer appetite for versatile, feature-rich cameras and lenses with ever-increasing resolution and video quality.

To remain at the top of the market, the camera manufacturer sought to update its infrastructure. All in all, the goal was to enhance team collaboration, eliminate organizational silos, facilitate employee access to proprietary resources, address efficiency issues, and speed product development.

To achieve this, however, the company faced multiple challenges. These included the poor historical performance of its legacy Jira and Confluence applications.

Sluggish Vendor Support
“The biggest pain point was the hoops they had to jump through to troubleshoot or even locate specific data,” explains Crystal Zapata, Cprime Technical Project Manager.

 

“We went from waiting a day or more to receive support responses to receiving them within hours — much better than before. The support requests we see now are about the applications’ enhanced functionality rather than their poor performance.” — Company Project Sponsor
 

The provider’s declining service frequently resulted in multi-day delays in response to simple support requests. With teams from multiple disciplines working from locations around the globe, time differences only compounded the issue. The delays affected everyone, from the company’s developers to its sales partners and customer service agents.

Poor Application Performance
Additionally, the solutions themselves — poorly configured instances of the normally reliable Atlassian Jira and Confluence — were not performing well, causing productivity issues and frustration.

“They wanted ownership of a streamlined, systematic, and cloud-based process that worked without submitting a support ticket and waiting days for a response, and a reliable Jira dashboard and Confluence reports that everyone—from their manufacturing team members and development project managers up to their CEO and CIOs—could look at and say, ‘This is where we’re at, this is what we’re tracking.’ ”

A Tight Schedule — Shifting Data at Scale without Interrupting Critical Workflows
Challenges also grew from the sheer volume of data to migrate and the technical and logistical demands of delivering functioning Jira and Confluence cloud applications.

“We usually try to fit each migration into a single weekend to avoid disruption, but there was so much data that a Saturday and Sunday weren’t enough,” says Yevgen Lasman, Cprime Data Migration engineer. “From a technical perspective, they required extensive customizations with interlocking dependencies, including a complex repository of proprietary mathematical formulas and important technical documentation. We also had to work with their third-party vendors and application suppliers to identify and address issues as they arose.”

The timing was critical. Due to the seasonal nature of their business, the migration had to occur without disrupting revenue or production during the peak product development and sales cycles.

“Finding the right time to make it all happen was key,” says Zapata. “Everything had to fit into a window immediately after their development freeze time and just before the busiest time of the year.”

Solution: A Cprime-Atlassian Platinum Partnership for Cloud Migration Success
The camera manufacturer decided to take control of its data by migrating their legacy Jira and Confluence applications to Atlassian Cloud hosting. To solve its migration challenges and ensure the process went smoothly, the company engaged an experienced, full service global Atlassian Enterprise Platinum Solution Partner. Specifically, Cprime was the ideal candidate to extend the client’s Atlassian toolset with expertise in accredited services, application integrations, training, and custom solutions.

To start the transformation, the Cprime migration team formed a comprehensive action plan beginning with a deep-dive audit. Consequently, over three weeks, they worked with the manufacturer’s steering committee, network specialists, technical project managers, and product stakeholders to assess its peer data, add-ons, and potential risks.

“Together, we identified their Atlassian application layouts and mappings and determined the most effective way to migrate their customizations, applications, and journal components,” says Zapata. “This included forming a plan for migrating the data the company had in use and important archival data from early camera iterations that they needed to keep for reference.”

A Flexible Migration Plan for Real-World Conditions
Once the manufacturer’s teams approved the migration roadmap, Cprime began iteration testing to identify potential pain points and establish realistic timelines for each phase of the move to the cloud.

“Finding the right time to make it all happen was key. Everything had to fit into a window immediately after their development freeze time and just before the busiest time of the year.” — Crystal Zapata, Cprime Technical Project Manager
“Migrating production systems, there is always an element of risk, but we mitigate that as much as possible,” says Zapata. “Here, we stepped the client through our test iterations, ensured the stakeholders understood and approved the process, and provided their business units with a clear schedule.”

Throughout the migration, the Cprime team remained flexible, adjusting the strategy and timelines to align with the manufacturer’s shifting production schedules.

“We were ready to go live in September, but, for business reasons including the peak sales season over Black Friday and Christmas, the manufacturer froze systematic changes to its production environments,” says Lasman. “We altered the roadmap to fit their timeframe. In the meantime, we laid everything out and tested it to ensure the company had the confidence to move forward when they were ready.”

With such large volumes of data involved, the scheduled migration intervals often exceeded low-activity periods between Friday evening and Monday morning. When work bled into the busier periods, Cprime ensured that the system remained unaffected by shifting only low-impact archived data that did not affect business activities or application performance.

Continued Support
Cprime support continued after the camera manufacturer signed off on the migration.

“We stayed on site for an additional two weeks, providing bespoke training documentation explaining changes to the process flow to avoid confusion,” Zapata says.

Results: Improved Issue Resolution, Application Performance, and Data Security
Despite the challenges, the company saw immediate results from its Jira and Confluence cloud migration.

Greater Visibility and Control
Taking control of their hosting and system administration provided the first set of benefits.

“They now have access to advanced features of Atlassian Cloud,” says Zapata. “They can also leverage customizations the cloud offers that their legacy provider couldn’t.”

More Responsive Customer Support
By switching to direct Enterprise tier Atlassian support rather than going through a third party, the company has seen response times to support tickets improve radically. Application speeds have also increased with internal and external Jira Service Management users describing the performance as “snappy.”

“We went from waiting a day or more to receiving support responses within hours — much better than before. We are very happy with the changes,” says a project sponsor. “The support requests we see now are about the applications’ enhanced functionality rather than its poor performance.”

Data Security and Application Performance Gains
Moving its Jira and Confluence data to the cloud also improved data access and security. By migrating its data, the camera manufacturer added a layer of protection through the redundancy and fail-over protection characteristic of managed cloud solutions.

Based on the results of the camera manufacturer’s cloud transformation, the company continues to turn to Cprime regularly for insights into its next steps.

“Even with the move to the cloud complete, we frequently meet with the company to discuss new use cases and advancements in the software,” says Zapata. “Cprime is happy to be on board to help them navigate future upgrades.”













Case Study #11

Company Details
Industry: International Finance and Investment Banking
Company Size: Over 300,000 Employees
Location: USA, With Regional Offices Worldwide
Products: Asset management, banking, commodities, credit cards, equities trading, insurance, investment management, mortgage loans, mutual funds, private equity, risk management, wealth management
Cprime Services:
Agile Training
Digital Learning as a Service
Group Training
Executive Summary
In an effort to constantly streamline and increase the value they deliver to their customers, this financial services leader launched a large-scale digital transformation that would span years. To support such a massive undertaking, they turned to the learning experts at Cprime to develop role-specific learning opportunities that would prepare their software engineers and development support teams to thrive in the faster-paced Agile environment they’d envisioned. The results have been remarkable.


  
The Client
Few financial institutions offer greater depth and breadth of services than this U.S. based global banking and investment leader. Besides retail and commercial banking services, they are also a custodian bank for many of the financial industry’s largest hedge and investment funds.

We began working with the organization in 2014 and the relationship has grown and strengthened over the years. In 2019, it took a huge leap forward when we took on a new initiative to deliver the company’s proprietary software engineering onboarding and training courses globally across six time zones. (To learn more about that epic undertaking, read the case study here.)

The Challenge: Onboarding and Upskilling a Global Development Organization
The need for qualified software engineers and DevOps professionals has been speeding up globally for years and shows no signs of slowing down. The financial services industry is no exception, and a large digital transformation necessitates new roles and qualified professionals to fill them. So, our client found themselves in a familiar position: needing to prepare a large number of existing team members to thrive under a new way of working even while zealously working to transform their development organization to support enterprise agility.

With a software engineering workforce numbering in the thousands—and constantly growing—this was no small task.

Fortunately, Cprime had already cultivated a strong and mutually beneficial relationship with the company that already spanned nearly six years.

Alex Gray, Cprime’s Lean Agile Practice Lead on the engagement, explains, “It was really the relationship and reputation we’d cultivated with the software engineers onboarding training that encouraged them to approach us about this new program. We were glad to get the opportunity.”

So, when this initiative began in 2022, they trusted us to get it off the ground.

The Solution: Custom “Blended Workshop” Learning Pathways Delivered with Speed and Finesse
Unlike our previous learning engagements with this client, they asked us to generate custom coursework rather than facilitating courses they had already developed internally. The initial request was for an e-learning course for Scrum Masters (referred to as Agile Leads within the company), so that’s where we began.

An initial plan for the learning pathways
“Our first step,” Alex says, “was to develop a storyboard outlining the general learning objectives for the e-learning course, and how the modules would progress. We put that together and reviewed it with the client leadership team.”

After iterating on the storyboard, they fleshed out the content within that framework. The goal for the e-learning course was to cover the core fundamentals any new or existing Agile Lead would need to know to succeed in their role. Rob Hill, a Cprime Learning Consultant, explains, “This was a combination of standard Agile concepts and best practices combined with terminology and processes unique to the organization, designed to get Agile Leads at various levels of experience up-to-speed quickly.”

Once we developed the initial content and the client approved, we collaborated with a partner vendor that created the actual course using Adobe Captivate. These experienced practitioners made suggestions around visuals, format and frequency of quizzes, and the general flow of the learning path. Where it added value, we implemented the changes before coming back to the client with a completed SCORM file. They uploaded that to their Learning Management System (LMS) so they could securely host the course internally and students could access it through their Learning and Development portal.


“It was really the relationship and reputation we’d cultivated with the software engineers onboarding training that encouraged them to approach us about this new program. We were glad to get the opportunity.” -Alex Gray, Cprime Lean Agile Practice Lead

Developing the blended workshop approach
“Although the e-learning course was very good,” Alex says, “we felt there would be tremendous value in giving the students the opportunity to interact with each other and expert instructors. So, we developed a complementary instructor-led workshop as well.”

Students completed the e-learning course remotely and at their own pace. Then, in small, structured cohorts, they would come together in the workshops (virtually or in-person) to discuss what they’d learned, ask questions, and run through several interactive exercises.

Rob continues, “This blended learning approach offers students the best of both worlds: the ease and convenience of e-learning and the enrichment of a more traditional face-to-face workshop so they can apply their knowledge to real-world scenarios and get some experience working with the new concepts. More practical, less theoretical.”

Expanding to meet growing demand
Templates_Medium_black_coralThe Agile Leads course thrilled the client, so they requested more courses in the same format for additional roles. Thus far, we have developed blended learning courses for:

Agile Lead
Product Owner
Agile Lead Coaching
UX Designer
Engineering Lead
Product Adoption
System Architect
Additionally, we have developed these instructor-led courses:

Agile Architect
Agile Designer
Agile Engineering Lead
Agile Product Owner
Agile Scrum Master
Agile Stakeholder
Agile Story Writing
Agile Customer Centricity
Defining your Product Roadmap
Implementing Kanban
Agile Team Transformation
Agile Product Adoption
Agile Stakeholder Management
Agile Coaching
Shift Left
Alex adds, “As the organization continues scaling their Agile practice and the teams mature, they have requested courses covering more mature subjects and advanced roles.”

The Results: Top Scores from Students and Enhanced Trust from Leadership
The results of this training program have been remarkable. Over 4,700 students have gone through the programs Cprime has developed since 2020. And feedback has remained very positive nearly across the board.

Feedback scores of 4+
“We request feedback from every student, and it has thrilled us to find nearly all of them have rated the course material and the instructors at four or better out of five,” Alex says. “We’ve heard comments like, ‘this wasn’t like any other classes I’ve taken—I feel like I can go out immediately and use what I’ve learned.’ That’s really gratifying.”

Of course, perfection is unrealistic. In one case, a trainer we brought in simply didn’t mesh well with the teams and we saw some negative feedback as a result. So, we immediately rectified the matter and feedback scores rose again.

“In some ways, negative feedback is even more valuable because it supports our and the client’s mutual commitment to continuous improvement.”

From trainers to trusted advisors
Alex concludes, “I think the most telling result of this engagement is how our relationship with the client has expanded. They already considered us excellent trainers. But now, they view us as trusted advisors, which is exactly what we want to be. Whether it be refining the courses in play or considering where new courses may be of value, we’re working together to deliver the greatest value to the organization.”













Case Study #12

Company Details
Industry: Aviation, Transportation
Company Size: 58,000 Employees
Location: Spain, UK, Ireland
Products: Passenger, Cargo, Ground, and Logistics Services
Cprime Services:
Agile Training
Digital Learning as a Service
Group Training
Executive Summary
Amid a worldwide pandemic with tremendous ramifications for the airline industry, this transportation leader focused on an enterprise digital transformation so they could come out of lockdown stronger and more resilient. To support their employees and ensure they could keep up with the speed of change, they turned to Cprime to curate, manage, and deliver a suite of targeted, role-specific training courses to great effect.


  
The Client
Since its formation in 2011, this company has grown into one of the world’s largest transportation groups. Operating leading airlines in Ireland, Spain, and the United Kingdom, its premium and budget brands connect over 350 destinations worldwide. Moreover, they serve nearly 120 million passengers and move countless tonnes of cargo annually.

The Challenge: An Unexpected Market Upheaval Provides an Opportunity to Upgrade Internal Processes
Every airline struggled through the long and unpredictable travel restrictions brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, and this group was no exception. However, looking ahead, leadership focused the time on improving the company’s internal tools and processes to ensure they came out of the situation stronger and in a better position to weather change in the future. Meanwhile, they also created a new business unit dedicated to their global tech operations. 

To learn more about the digital and scaled Agile transformation they took on, read the case study here.

A vital part of every successful enterprise-wide transformation is a robust training program to enable and empower employees at all levels of the organisation to succeed in the new reality the transformation is creating. However, the global tech business unit did not have a formal learning and development program set up. 

So, they turned to Cprime—their trusted transformation partner—to quickly spin up a training program that could start making a difference immediately.

The Solution: An Innovative Approach to Rapid Training Success Across 19 Tracks
Unlike many learning and development engagements Cprime has headed up, a quick turnaround was of high priority because the client was pursuing a tight timeline for their digital transformation. By the time the organisation was ready to pursue this new training program, the goal was to have employees fully trained on new roles, concepts, and processes (which were still being established) progressively over a period of 18 to 24 months, starting as soon as possible.

Rather than creating bespoke training courses with original custom content—an excellent but time-consuming option—the training team decided to focus on sourcing, curating, and coordinating delivery of existing courses that would fill the client’s needs as quickly as possible.

Progressive, role-based training in three phases
“We started by outlining a series of learning pathways in three phases,” recalls Alex Gray, Cprime’s Lean Agile Practice Lead on the engagement. “They had to be role-specific, developed in priority order. They also needed to be tailored to ensure students would be able to absorb the elementary level coursework immediately, and would then be knowledgeable enough to successfully progress through intermediate and advanced coursework as the transformation progressed around them.” 

As a result, pathways were developed to guide students to take on 19 different roles within the transformed tech business unit:



“Each level of each pathway included a group of core modules that contained the basic concepts, required skills, and practical guidelines around fulfilling each role in the transformed organisation. Then, a range of additional modules provided supplemental knowledge and deeper dives into each role, which the students could take on at their own pace.”

But how were the learning pathways developed so quickly? 

A new training role created to fill the need
Alex continues, “Since we were not creating any of the content, we needed to approach building these learning pathways in a different way. I worked closely with Aradhana Sabherwal—one of Cprime’s experienced Agile Coaches—to fill a new role we haven’t needed in the past. We called it the Learning Curator.”

The responsibility of the Learning Curator was to:

Identify any learning challenges across the business unit
Suggest the skills that could help the organisation meet those challenges
Liaise with internal SMEs to understand the client’s learning context
Seek out Agile learnings that could instil those skills in the teams
Describe the modes and formats in which the learning would be delivered to the teams
Design the learning pathways
Build the system and access points to support the teams’ learning and application
“Once we had an outline of the pathways completed, it became a matter of leveraging Cprime’s own catalogue of existing instructor-led courses where possible, and seeking out third-party classes and interactive video courses to fill in the gaps where necessary.”

Coordination and management to keep the program on track
This unique combination of formats and providers required the efforts of an exceptional Learning Manager—a role well-suited to Cprime’s Vicky Brownsell.

“Vicky serves as the coordinator that ensures the ongoing training program runs smoothly, because there are a lot of moving parts.”


“Once we had an outline of the pathways completed, it became a matter of leveraging Cprime’s own catalogue of existing instructor-led courses where possible, and seeking out third-party classes and interactive video courses to fill in the gaps where necessary.” -Alex Gray, Cprime Lean Agile Practice Lead

The Learning Manager’s responsibilities include:

Hosting in our learning management system (LMS) and training management system (TMS)
Coordination of the training schedules to support each student’s progressive learning path 
Booking participants onto Cprime and external courses
Following up with participants to make sure they have booked, attended, and completed classes
Engaging with Cprime instructors and third party vendors to solidify schedules 
Agreeing the best possible rates with third party vendors to ensure the client is getting the best deal without compromising on quality
Coordinating billing and invoicing between the client and training providers
“Vicky’s work has been invaluable over the last three quarters as the training program has only grown in size and complexity,” Alex says.

The Results: Smooth, Progressive Training with Clear Practical Impact
clipboard icon“The most powerful evidence of the success of this program is the fact that the students who have gone through the program are successfully applying what they’ve learned to their evolving roles within the changing organisation.” 

So far (as of January 2023) 265 students have benefited from a total of 932 hours of education in the ten months since the program launched. Cprime has also worked simultaneously with the client to develop internal capabilities so they will be able to take over the management responsibilities to keep the program running continuously going forward.

Alex adds, “Something else that underlines the value Cprime brought to this engagement was the fact that our executive sponsor started out requesting continuous input as every detail was arranged. But, she very quickly grew comfortable with the level of quality, efficiency, and professionalism we brought to the table. Now, she only wants a weekly update to keep her in the loop, and she’s thrilled with the outcomes so far.”

Consequently, as the client’s transformation progresses, these qualified and experienced students are forming a strong foundation of expertise to solidify the new way of working.













Case Study #13

Company Details
Industry: Fintech for wealth management advisors
Company Size: 200+ employees
Location: Montreal, Quebec and Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Migrations
Cloud Consulting
Software Licensing
Executive Summary
Croesus leveraged on-premise server-based instances of Jira and Confluence and saw the need for a change. They reached out for guidance and selected Cprime as an advisor and migration partner who could provide a full suite of services, knowledge, and experience, and could work closely with the Croesus team in an Agile environment. Cprime excelled in that partner role as we were aligned on budget, timelines, and team agile mindset.


  
Overview
Croesus has spent thirty years building a solid international reputation based largely on its cutting-edge proprietary wealth management software solution. Their clients account for over a trillion dollars in assets managed with the Croesus solutions, so their development team has a heavy responsibility to maintain continuous security and efficiency. 

As a staunch advocate of Lean/Agile development practices, the Croesus development team relies heavily on Atlassian products, Jira and Confluence, to support their planning and day-to-day operations. Seeking the enhanced reliability, security, and functionality available on the Atlassian Cloud platform, they determined to undertake a migration to the cloud. We had a GO!

Cprime Canada enjoys a position as the leading cloud migration partner with hundreds of successful migrations under our belt. But, according to Croesus sponsor, that wasn’t the key deciding factor when they chose to partner with Cprime.

“Cprime advocates Agile and DevOps principles; that’s how they approach each project and journey. I knew that we’d be able to partner closely with Cprime without having to sacrifice our internal processes or be a burden on the team. They could meet us where we were, empower the team, and share that knowledge in terms of workflow, making for a smooth and successful migration.”

Marie-Christine Legault (M.C.), Cprime’s account liaison and Head of Canada, concurs. “It was important from the start for us to work with a practical and actionable plan for Croesus. We wanted to ensure workFLOW and that we worked as ONE unit with our Migration Team and the Croesus Team. We could adapt schedules and key steps to accommodate each member of their migration team in a trustful manner.”

“I knew that we’d be able to partner closely with Cprime without having to sacrifice our internal processes or be a burden on the team. They could meet us where we were, empower the team, and share that knowledge in terms of workflow, making for a smooth and successful migration.”
The Solution
Over a three-month period, Cprime and Croesus collaborated to complete a successful migration to Atlassian Cloud and licensing agreement. And, we put together a wonderful world renowned roster of guest keynotes and Cprime speakers for an insightful DevOps/Agile full-day event for employees.

Communication was key
One of the first steps in the process was to set up a Google Chat group including all members of the Cprime and Croesus teams so we could work closely to accommodate professional and personal agendas. This was key for maximum efficiency and real time management for all.

“The chat group was instrumental in maintaining communication and transparency from the start,” M.C. Legault says. “Everyone felt free to ask questions on the fly and this allowed us to make decisions that shortened the time frame, lessened risk, and gave visibility to all. The chat brought us together as one unit for the duration of the project and beyond. We got along well — a true international collaboration as we had our expert teammates working from our four Cprime Global offices.”

Starting with a good cup of coffee, we planned a great strategy
The initial conversations were followed by a lightweight assessment to ensure a thorough understanding of the client’s existing systems and how they interacted with the data. Yevgen Lasman, an Atlassian Tools/Migration Specialist with Cprime, recalls, “Croesus was working with a few instances of Jira already in the cloud and one on-premise. So, we developed a migration strategy that would begin with a consolidation, a testing timeline, then a full migration of all data to the new cloud instance.”

Incorporating add-ons
They also relied on a few Jira add-on applications that had to be factored into the plans. Chief among them was Xray, which they were using for test management. Since Xray is available on the cloud, the add-on data could be smoothly parceled along with the main data migration.

Software licensing and BIG savings
Cprime Licensing Team was working behind the scenes and assisted with selecting the optimal licensing options for the new Atlassian Cloud software instances, even finding a way that was more economical for Croesus. They continue to manage the licenses as needed.

A Spring Break migration weekend
With the preliminary planning, consolidation, and test migrations complete, the production migration occurred over the course of one weekend in March of 2022. 

Yevgen Lasman recalls, “In the first moments of the migration, we had a few little hiccups that were identified and expected, but we were able to resolve everything safely on the spot. Both teams were all hands on deck for the smooth ride of the migration. When Monday came around, everyone was charged up and in shape.” Job done and high five TEAMS.

The Croesus project sponsor says, “During the sprint demo, our internal team
would highlight a few impediments or little issues that had come up. The says, “During the sprint demo, our internal team would highlight a few impediments or little issues that had come up. The teams were always able to resolve everything with Cprime quickly and completely. Challenges were immediately followed up with a solid plan for mitigating the risk and moving continuously ahead. I never needed to fix anything myself or get involved or participate in weekly project meetings; I never had to worry about it or put out any fires, which confirmed to me that we’d chosen the right partner. As an executive sponsor, that made my job so much easier.”

M.C. Legault agrees. “Letting our teams be hands-on, identifying what needs to be done, and empowering them was at the heart of this partnership. That’s really the value of working side-by-side and becoming one team and listening. We’ve done so many of these migrations, licensing deals, with add-ons and plugins, we’ve truly seen it all. But what needs to shine is our mindset and transparency with the Croesus team …there is a lot of value when you build a relationship and trustful collaboration.”

“The teams were always able to resolve everything with Cprime quickly and completely… I never needed to fix anything myself or get involved or participate in weekly project meetings; I never had to worry about it or put out any fires, which confirmed to me that we’d chosen the right partner. As an executive sponsor, that made my job so much easier.”
The Results
The migration to Atlassian Cloud was completed successfully and rapidly. A solid result is that Croesus has since decommissioned their on-premise servers, lessening internal infrastructure, and is working completely on the cloud platform. 

The development team reports a seamless transition with no impact on their workflow, lots of learning, and new skill sets that were shared by the Cprime migration team. Now, Croesus is benefiting from the platform’s enhanced security and performance without compromising functionality.

Croesus concludes, “Cprime collaborated closely with our team, working in an Agile fashion the entire time. Communication, well-being, and transparency were a constant, and any issues were quickly resolved — from technical challenges to scheduling conflicts, and everything in between. We couldn’t be happier with how the project played out.”














Case Study #14

Company Details
Industry: Cloud Communications Platform as a Service
Company Size: 8,000 employees
Location: Silicon Valley, USA
Products: Cloud-Based Customer Communications, Customer Relations Management, Marketing Communications, Messaging
Cprime Services:
Agile Transformation
Lean Portfolio Management Training
SAFe® Transformation
Value Stream Management
Jira Implementation
Executive Summary
This client was struggling with a history of siloed work, where everyone worked on everything. This worked as a startup, but as the organization grew, this approach didn’t scale. This Silicon Valley startup turned to Cprime and SAFe® to improve its business agility.


  
Overview
With a rich suite of API tools, this Silicon Valley-based Cprime client is a communications facilitator. They provide a cloudbased communications platform that helps their customers enhance their customer engagement processes and ensure their communications stay contextually relevant. Clients can use the platform’s development tools to embed SMS, messaging, voice, and video directly into their customerfacing applications. Vendor-agnostic and easily integrated within any application or CRM, the company’s technology empowers personalized interactions. An emphasis on leveraging engagement data further improves its clients’ communications and customer outcomes. The cloud communications provider employs 8,000 people and operates in 180 countries worldwide. It currently provides services to over two million registered developers.

Challenge: Aligning Non-Technical Business Units for Efficient Growth
The communications provider realized early on that to remain competitive after it transitioned from startup to public company, deliver innovation, and provide seamless customer service, it needed to improve its operations at scale. Atypically, however, the platform wasn’t directing its transformation goals at its technology or engineering units. Instead, the communications software provider wanted to improve agility within their business groups.

“The focus was the company’s account executives (AEs) working in its CRM space,” explains Kyle Dukes, SPCT and Cprime Portfolio Coach. “They had technology supporting them, but they centered more on supporting their modules and creating workflows—amidst a technical organization, they were not a technical group.”

The business unit needed to align with the company’s engineering teams. The goal was to eliminate duplicated or wasted effort and costly information silos.

“We were operating in a chaotic environment. Our team was burning out, and we had no visibility into their full workload,” says the company’s Director of Business Alignment and PMO.“ Each person was working independently on their own projects — often tackling the same problems without realizing it.”

“The fundamental business problem was that the business group was operating like a oneman army — everyone did everything and planning suffered,” explains Kyle. “As they prepared to shift from startup to public company, they realized that approach just wouldn’t scale.”


After just one program increment, we saw an immediate improvement in our team’s organization and efficiency. People have clearer roles and responsibilities. They are working in teams instead of individual silos. Our business team has full control over their capacity. They are feeling more job satisfaction because they now know how their work aligns with strategic priorities.
— Director of Business Alignment and PMO

Selecting Cprime—a SAFe® Agent of Change
While many organizations prefer a hybrid approach that incorporates aspects of multiple scaling frameworks, this company decided that, rather than creating their own method, SAFe® was the way to improve ways of working, customer relationships, and time to market. Approaching Cprime was a decision driven by a sponsor within the company leadership who had first-hand knowledge of both Lean-Agile transformation and how Cprime approaches it.

“Our sponsor had prior SAFe® experience,” says Kyle. “With their encouragement, the company learned the value that Cprime and SAFe® would provide going in — that gave us a big leg up when it came to buy-in from the rest of their organization.”

Creating custom tools
With the executives on board, Cprime began the business unit’s transformation by implementing Jira, the Atlassian project planning, tracking, and management tool. Jira helps teams manage work using Lean-Agile methodologies. Working with the platform’s AE teams to define their workflows and processes, the Cprime team delivered a heavily customized Jira instance specific to their requirements.

“They hadn’t worked with an Agile lifecycle management (ALM) tool before Jira, so Cprime worked with them to spin it up. We integrated Jira with their Salesforce CRM, suggested custom fields, and implemented add-ons to support Agile and lean portfolio management (LPM),” says Kyle. “We gave them a tool they could put all their work, stories, features, and epics into.”

Practical experience for real-world scenarios
With Jira in place, the Cprime team moved ahead with the transformation. First, Cprime coaches worked with their sponsor to form a Lean-Agile Center of Excellence (LACE) to oversee the transformation. Next, Cprime conducted virtual trainings via Leading SAFe® and Implementing SAFe®—customer-centric business agility and SAFe® Program Consultants—for the business unit’s change agents.

To provide the AEs with a strong background in working in an Agile Release Train (ART), the Cprime coaches also ran SAFe® for Teams. Additional coaching around LPM rounded out the communications platform’s SAFe® toolkit.

In keeping with its core tenet to provide practical and actionable skills rather than certifications based solely on theoretical coursework, Cprime created multiple custom workshops. The topics included Product Owner and Product Manager, Epic Prioritization, Vision and Roadmap Creation, Value Stream and ART Identification, and Backlog Management. Each subject area aligned with the teams’ current workloads to give the training real-world context.

“The big milestone for Cprime was when the company launched its first ART. We prepared content to support their PI planning, identify their value streams, and prepare them for how the ART would look,” says Kyle. “It was really cool watching them learn and grow because sometimes clients push back. These teams were fully on board with the new way of working.”

Putting cross-organizational alignment up on the radar
In an effort to accelerate time to market, the Cprime team also facilitated both an AgilityHealth Team Radar assessment and Business Agility Assessment from leadership. The aim was to ensure a clear flow of information across their continuous integration and continuous deployment (CI/CD) pipelines and alleviate the disconnect between sales and engineering. Introducing and evaluating the use of Lean-Agile principles across the tech and business disciplines also provided the communications platform leadership and Cprime with a baseline to measure future improvements using Agile outcome, flow, and competency metrics.

Throughout the transformation, the Cprime team supported the process by suggesting tweaks and offering guidance.

“Looking at their metrics, Cprime made recommendations for improvement,” says Kyle. “That included creating an innovation deck so the company, as a team of teams, had a roadmap to changes that removed some of their impediments and further streamlined their workflow. It was all about improving how quickly they could go from a new feature request to getting that feature into the customer’s hands so it would generate revenue.”

Engaged Teams and Increased Revenues
Despite hurdles like hiring challenges, transitioning to a fully remote work environment, and a decline in the economy, the communications platform’s transformation has shown many positive results.

“In just over six months, we were able to fully transition our AEs to SAFe® ways of working,” says the platform’s Business Alignment and PMO Director. “Cprime helped us stay the course by coming up with creative ways to work around our hurdles, and set and stick to milestone dates.”

After the transformation, the company’s organic revenue for the year is up 33%; total revenue is up by 41%. The number of developer subscriptions rose from 240,000 to 275,000.


Because we are a business systems and operations team, some SAFe® practices don’t fit our situation and needs. The Cprime coaches recognized this — they led with an open mind to solving our problems creatively and held firm when we needed to get out of our own way.
— Director of Business Alignment and PMO

A change for the better
In cultural terms, teams are more engaged and have a better understanding of the organization’s goals. The company also remedied the disconnect between disciplines by opening up the flow of information between its AEs and DevOps. With improved metric tracking, management also has greater visibility into each value stream’s performance and can adjust their plans accordingly.

“After just one program increment, we saw an immediate improvement in our team’s organization and efficiency. People have clearer roles and responsibilities. They are working in teams instead of individual silos,” explains the Director. “Our business team has full control over their capacity and is feeling more job satisfaction because they now know how their work aligns with strategic priorities.”

Creative Flexibility
In addition to the business benefits delivered, the Cprime team impressed the platform’s leadership with their flexibility in tailoring the training to meet uncommon and clientspecific use cases.

“Because we are a business systems and operations team, some SAFe® practices didn’t fit our situation and needs,” concludes the Director. “The Cprime coaches recognized this— they led with an open mind to solving our problems creatively and held firm when we needed to get out of our own way.”













Case study #15

Company Details
Industry: Utilities
Company Size: 28,000 Employees
Location: U.S. and United Kingdom (headquartered in U.K.)
Products: Electricity and natural gas
Cprime Services:
Agile Transformation (Infrastructure)
SAFe Transformation
Agile Team Training
Executive Summary
Long cycle times and waterfall methodology hindered this utility company’s efforts to respond to change in the market and produce consistent value for customers with evolving needs. Cprime was called in to pilot a new Agile way of working within the back-end infrastructure division with excellent results.


  
Overview
This leading international utility company delivers gas and electricity to millions of homes and businesses in the U.S. and the U.K. That’s a tremendous amount of work and a heavy responsibility. So, it makes sense that they’re keenly interested in continually improving quality and efficiency of the work they do.

With that idea in mind, the organization embarked on a pilot program in 2019 to incorporate agile methodologies into the division responsible for IT infrastructure solutions for their entire back office. This is a vital support system for running their business.

And, Cprime was there to help.

The Challenge
Historically, while they produced consistent results for the organization, the division struggled with long cycle times and process complications that hindered their ability to derive full value from their efforts. It was difficult for them to respond to an increasing rate of change, resulting in poor morale, low quality, growing technical debt, and late delivery.

Cycle times
Long cycle times resulted in very hard-to-manage projects, so there was a lot of inefficiency and waste. Likewise, waterfall methods at this scale incur tremendous risk for most of the time the project is active while only providing value at the very end. As a result, customers didn’t see value delivered when they needed it.

So, reducing cycle times and getting each project to completion as quickly and efficiently as possible was essential to success.

Hardware vs software
It’s important to note here that applying agile methodologies to infrastructure and hardware is quite different from the traditional software development use case. The most significant difference between them is that it’s impossible to derive value incrementally in a hardware context. Generally speaking, every improvement made before the final cut-over to activate the new upgraded system is an “enabler” in agile terms. The customer value only comes at the final cut-over. Examples are designs, cable installation, device configuration, and installation, all of which are required before the device is brought online.

But, that doesn’t mean that the incremental nature of agile processes wasn’t beneficial in a hardware context. In fact, although the very first installation managed in the pilot program went faster than its predecessors under the waterfall methodology, the process really started to speed up after several iterations. This success is attributed to the frequent retrospectives, which gave the team the opportunity to routinely identify ways to improve throughout the process rather than just once at the end of a long waterfall project.

Vendor contracts
Another significant issue that stood in the way of a more effective development process was the company’s long-standing relationship with third-party vendors that handled all the infrastructure implementation work.

Under the existing contracts, they defined success by the production of a predefined deliverable. Penalties were in place for deviating from the plan and for upsetting strict timelines. On paper, this should have ensured the teams accomplished work on time and on budget, but the reality was that the vendor’s priorities routinely created a roadblock to agility. Since the vendor’s pay was contingent on delivering what they initially agreed upon, they naturally resisted any opportunity to pivot for the sake of accommodating the customer or emerging conditions.

Budget process
A third major challenge preventing more agile development in the infrastructure division was the budgeting process known as sanctioning. Since it’s a utility company, its revenue is tightly regulated. They need to justify capital expenditure in order to recoup the cost by requesting permission to raise rates. And this sanctioning process can be both time- and labor-intensive.

Before this initiative, they built the sanctioning process around individual projects, some of which could take years to reach completion. In those cases, they didn’t recoup the costs for years. Once the sanctioning authority approved a budget, it was difficult to adjust priorities, and doing so took a lot of time. As a result, pivoting based on new information or reprioritizing to increase value was difficult without running into immediate budgetary concerns.

Solution
Beginning early in 2019, a Cprime consultant in the U.S. worked with division leadership and an independent consultant in the U.K. to start planning their agile transformation and implementing agile ways of working in various small projects. Over the next 18 months, they provided extensive training and process optimization across five infrastructure teams and, in March 2020, launched the first official Agile Release Train (ART), which is the basis of the following results:

SAFe
They quickly determined that SAFe was the proper framework to support the coordination of five interdependent teams that needed to run on the same delivery cadence. It made sense to do big room planning with all these teams and track their dependencies, so they created the ART and unified the teams’ activities using a single backlog and Planning Increment (PI) schedule.

Additionally, the SAFe framework extends beyond the infrastructure teams themselves to support true business agility. This was a vital piece of the puzzle because an effective solution needed to affect the budgetary process and the relationship with vendors. And, the solution had to scale if and when the pilot program succeeded.

As noted above, applying SAFe principles to infrastructure instead of software development required some creative problem solving and flexibility, but the final solution proved highly effective.

Training
Training_Medium_black_coralIt required extensive training to support this massive undertaking and obtain buy-in among stakeholders from both the parent company and their implementation vendors.

In February of 2019, leadership received SAFe training to assist with planning and rollout of the initial agile ways of working. After several earmarked projects kicked off under brand new agile programs, the consultants trained 50 people using the interactive Scrum Master and SAFe training programs in December of 2019.

Process and contract recommendations
To further support this agile transformation, the consultants also dug into existing processes to identify roadblocks to agility and recommend solutions to overcome these challenges.

One significant aspect of the resulting solution was identifying the most efficient process for each typical infrastructure project — from wiring a WiFi router to replacing a server — and creating duplicatable epics and stories that could be easily cloned and redeployed every time they scheduled the project. Once they completed this work, through relentless improvement during each sprint retrospective, they refined the process for each technology at every sprint. The planning and execution of repeatable projects became like a well-oiled machine or assembly line process, which dramatically improved speed and quality.

There were also dramatic improvements to the contract with the implementation vendor. The customer altered the relationship and agreement from a focus on deliverables to a time-and-materials arrangement to support agility. This allowed the vendor’s and company’s team members to collaborate more effectively to deliver the most value to the customer rather than following a premade plan at all costs.

With agile methodologies in place, the sanctioning process could be detached from individual projects and, instead, be linked to more consolidated portfolios of agile initiatives. The program’s success ensures that the company will be moving to a consolidated sanctioning process going forward. This means sanctioning only needs to occur once a year for each ART, while the portfolio maintains the flexibility internally to allocate and prioritize the budget as required to maximize value.

Results
In short, the results of these efforts were phenomenal.

The agile teams drastically improved cycle times over teams who were still running traditionally. For example, the pilot program successfully upgraded 50 sites in just 12 months. Or, roughly, a 30% improvement in productivity due to reduced cycle times.

The customer dramatically streamlined non-delivery processes, and consolidated 70 projects to just three, eliminating the overhead for the excess projects. And, perhaps most importantly, the customer received markedly greater value faster — a vital component of every successful agile transformation.

As an added benefit, many of the team members noted improved morale, greater employee engagement, and other less tangible improvements. One stated, “this is the best team I’ve ever been on!”

Going forward
The success of the pilot program has inspired the infrastructure division to implement the same agile transformation across all portfolios in the U.S. and U.K. over the next year. Doing so will require working with and training all the vendors across territories, training hundreds of employees and vendor representatives, and reworking budgeting arrangements across the board.

We’re thrilled to be working with the client to make this dream a reality.













Case Study #16


Company Details
Industry: Enterprise software
Company Size: Over 200 employees serving over 1,000 clients
Location: International, based in Colorado, USA
Products: Enterprise planning software
Cprime Services:
Custom Integrations
Custom Atlassian Integrations
Executive Summary
Gtmhub sought a streamlined, efficient system to help clients connect their OKRs with Jira Align, Miro, and Aha!. Speed was crucial as they sought to improve the OKR process. With the help of Cprime's enterprise integrations specialists, they improved the speed and efficiency of otherwise manual processes and created a more transparent process for a critical strategic planning function.


  
Overview
Gtmhub is a leading cloud-based strategy execution platform utilizing the OKR methodology for enterprises and non-profits. Their proprietary solution offers the ability to connect to over 100 systems (CRMs, databases, issue tracking systems, marketing automation, etc.) and calculate key results in real time.

 

“Cprime has been a trusted tech partner of Gtmhub throughout the various projects we’ve collaborated on.” – Desislava Tileva, Director of Product Management, Gtmhub
 

The Challenge
Gtmhub acts as the source of truth for creating and executing business objectives. A key component of this value comes from a wide library of app integrations, allowing for updates from a variety of sources to be directly pulled into the platform. Consistently growing and improving this library in a timely fashion is key to their continued success.

Desislava Tileva, Director of Product Management at Gtmhub, explains, “During the rapid ongoing growth of Gtmhub, we’ve witnessed a large number of integration requests. Being a customer-driven organization, we wanted to address as many of them as possible, while doing it in a timely and fashionable manner. Naturally, we had to prioritize, which meant some projects could take longer to deliver, but we knew we could do better.”

Gtmhub had three custom integrations they saw as priorities for meeting their clients needs. With the goal of expanding their library without sacrificing other ongoing projects, they decided to engage an outside partner. This vital work couldn’t be left to chance, so they turned to Cprime. “Cprime has been a trusted tech partner of Gtmhub throughout the various projects we’ve collaborated on,” Tileva says.

The Solution
In collaboration with their clients, Gtmhub had a clear definition of what was needed, so no extended discovery or planning phases were required. Instead, the two teams worked closely together to outline requirements and, very quickly, Cprime set about building API-to-API integrations to solve the client’s problems:

Jira Align integration
A plugin that displays a portion of the Jira Align interface within the client solution’s interface. It allows users to map the necessary elements in Jira Align to track them through the solution.

Miro integration
A custom integration that displays a portion of the client solution’s interface in the online whiteboard and collaboration tool, Miro, enabling users to create Miro objects during brainstorming sessions, then transfer them to Gtmhub to continue working with them. And, the process works both ways — items already in Gtmhub can be pulled to Miro to serve as a foundation for brainstorming sessions.

 

“Partnering with the team at Gtmhub empowered our development team to put out our best work rapidly. The result is going to be of great value to Gtmhub’s customers.” – Anton Rosales, Delivery Manager, Cprime
 

These integrations work together to support the following highly-efficient workflow:
The OKRs are created during a brainstorming session in Miro.
The approved OKRs in the Miro board are then sent to the client’s proprietary solution through our Miro integration.
The Jira Align dashboard can be accessed through the client’s UI and epics can be mapped to the relevant OKRs in their solution.
Since Cprime completed these integrations, the teams have undertaken a project currently being prepared for public access:

Aha! integration – A custom integration to link elements from the client solution and display them in Aha! for the MVP stage.
Anton Rosales, Cprime Delivery Manager for the project, recalls, “Partnering with the team at Gtmhub empowered our development team to put out our best work rapidly. The result is going to be of great value to Gtmhub’s customers.”

Tileva confirms, “The Cprime team has both the in-depth technical knowledge and experience in working with large clients to properly define and understand the project scope and underlying needs. When applicable, Cprime has provided us with access to a sandbox environment enabling internal testing and higher transparency into the project development.”

The Result
This project improved the speed and efficiency of otherwise manual processes and created a more transparent process for a critical strategic planning function. The integrations enabled customers to brainstorm their objectives in Miro, pull them into Gtmhub, and connect them directly to epics in Jira Align – tracking progress towards a shared goal with every task delivered. Prioritization has been simplified and employees’ motivation has grown significantly.

These integrations allowed Gtmhub to deliver significant value to its users without deprioritizing other crucial projects. A dedicated delivery manager ensured Gtmhub could stay focused on the business requirements and allowed Cprime to focus on utilizing its experienced team to deal with all the technical issues.

Tileva concludes, “The professionalism and attention to detail of the Cprime team made our conjoined work a breeze. Anton ensured there was smooth coordination of all activities, meetings, and requirements and was quick to respond and implement the desired scope.”












Case study #17

Company Details
Industry: Aviation, Transportation
Company Size: 58,000 Employees
Location: Spain, UK, Ireland
Products: Passenger, Cargo, Ground, and Logistics Services
Cprime Services:
Group Training
Agile Training and Coaching
SAFe Transformations
Executive Summary
With over 58,000 employees, multiple airlines, and several operating companies to oversee, this air transportation giant turned to Cprime to align its siloed business units and transform its legacy systems.


  
Background
Established in 2011, this company has grown into one of the world’s largest private airline groups. They own leading airlines in Ireland, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Further, its premium and budget brands serve over 270 destinations worldwide and carry a total of 113 million passengers annually.

The heart of the group’s competitive strategy is the integrated logistics platform all its airlines share. This common platform allows the group to maximize its efficiency and performance. It is an approach intended to simplify operations and allow its subsidiary airlines to maintain unique identities while encouraging loyalty through rewarding customer experiences.

Challenge: Delivering Predictable Value Across Multiple Companies and Business Functions
With three operating companies (OpCos) providing internal technical, cargo, and business services, the goal was to enable each of its airlines to focus efforts on target customers rather than logistical concerns.

However, the group’s technical arm, a vital part of its infrastructure responsible for customer relationship management, couldn’t keep pace with the demands of the organization’s airlines and other operating companies. Consequently, this shortcoming undermined the core operations strategy and caused friction between what should have been complementary business units.

 

“Our executive sponsors appreciated that Cprime wouldn’t just use its own people to fill roles—we would train their people to do the work. They also knew that, because Cprime teams are multifunctional, we could achieve results more economically using fewer people.” — Sian Bernadine, Cprime Delivery Manager
 

“Operating under the waterfall model, the technical unit struggled to move fast enough to meet the rest of the organization’s needs,” explains Cprime Delivery Manager Sian Bernadine. “As a result, the other operating companies elicited external technical support. This resulted in increased expenses, lost revenues, and reduced value delivery.”

Leveling up problematic legacy systems
Discrepancies in the Agile maturity of the different airlines within the group presented another pain point that affected consistency or efficiency.

“The largest airline in the group, a national carrier, is a legacy institution that has been around for decades. Like the technical unit, their systems and business process needed to catch up with modern technologies and ways of working—even accepting certain credit cards for online bookings was problematic,” says Bernadine. “Under these conditions, the carrier struggled to pivot when the COVID-19 pandemic stopped passenger travel. It was equally slow to get everything up and running when travel finally resumed.”

The airline group was losing out to other airlines that could adapt and offer services more quickly. It needed to get its airlines and operating companies on the same page. The organization needed a framework to enable innovation in the form of stable, high-performance, and quick-to-market products and systems.

Attempting to put theory into practice
But achieving transformation and progressing its Agile journey across multiple OpCos and business functions presented multiple pitfalls. The airline group had previously attempted an Agile transformation by enlisting a high-profile international business consultancy to help it create a collaborative roadmap and ways of working consistent with the Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe©). Despite a two-year effort, the results proved more theoretical than practical.

“Although they worked with management to create a viable operating model, the consultancy lacked SAFe© execution knowledge,” says Bernadine. “They weren’t successful in setting it up or scaling their ideas across proper Agile teams. They created some Agile pockets, but they weren’t coherent or widespread.”

The consultancy was also filling Agile roles with its own people rather than offering practical coaching and driving value-centric behavior. The solution was neither cost-effective nor sustainable.

Multifunctional Cprime Teams: A SAFe©, Economical, and Effective Solution
When the consultancy suggested hiring two more external specialists at a significant expense rather than working to train the airline group’s existing resources, management turned to Cprime.

“Based on a successful Cprime engagement in another area, when the airline group committed to a full SAFe© transformation they looked to us to get the ball rolling,” says Bernadine. “Our executive sponsors appreciated that Cprime wouldn’t just use its own people to fill roles—we would train their people to do the work. They also knew that, because Cprime teams are multifunctional, we could achieve results more economically using fewer people.”

Incrementally delivering Agile autonomy
The first phase involved Cprime assisting the technical unit to establish an independent Agile release train (ART) and effective program increment (PI) planning. Cprime began the three-month engagement by providing two scrum masters, two SAFe© program consultants (SPCs), and a SAFe© program consultant trainer (SPCT). The initial phase focused on four eight-person teams from the technical unit with management providing additional support. In true Agile fashion, Cprime provided training in logical, digestible increments.

“We didn’t go straight in and push them to an Agile release train. Our first step was building scrum teams and helping them sprint. We coached them on how to be agile, building SAFe© habits, and reinforcing Agile ceremonies,” says Bernadine. “Once they were working as Agile teams we made sure they understood what they needed to do to PI plan their next eight weeks of work.”

Not surprisingly, within three months the teams from the technical unit were working autonomously toward their first release.

“With the release train established and PI 1 complete, they were self-sufficient in Agile. We proved the concept with the technical unit and the group’s management saw clear improvement,” says Bernadine. “That’s when they let us loose on the flag carrier and extended the engagement to include the other operating companies—cargo and ground services.”

Results: From Overpromising and Underdelivering to 93% Predictability
With phase one complete, the effects of the transformation are apparent throughout the technical unit. The technical teams achieved 93% predictability in PI 1. They did this by setting aside the waterfall method in favor of an Agile release train. It was a vast improvement over their previous achievements. Having effective technical support alone equated to savings for multiple operating companies. Their ability to deliver value when and as promised had obvious business benefits.

“Technical have built up their internal capability. They don’t have to rely on sending products outside of the org to get built. Other business units no longer need to hire temps to complete vital tasks. They are providing real business value by internally creating products and services more quickly,” says Bernadine. “One practical benefit is that recruits no longer need to wait days to get their laptops. Employees can start working as soon as they come through the door. That has restored faith in the tech team throughout the organization.”

Removing the silos
The group’s management was particularly happy with the technical unit’s shift to product-centric Agile development from its previously hierarchical, inconsistent, and siloed approach.

 

“We have significantly improved Agile capabilities across our organization. We now have a healthy technical backlog and have abandoned the silo mentality in favor of collaboration between our OpCos and business units.” — Executive Sponsor
 

“We have significantly improved Agile capabilities across the organization,” says one executive sponsor. “We now have a healthy technical backlog and have abandoned the silo mentality in favor of collaboration between our OpCos and business units.”

The transformation has also positively affected the cultural conditions within the technical group.

“One of the first things we noticed was that the teams were a lot happier,” says Bernadine. “People’s habits have changed because they understand the business vision—they know what they are working toward.”

A future of independent Agile transformation at scale
Following up immediately on phase one’s successes and the transformation of the technical unit, the airline group began phase two. Its goal was to establish similar PI planning and Agile release trains in the cargo and business OpCos and bring the national carrier’s Agile maturity in line with the rest of the organization within three months.

Besides phase two’s basic ART and PI planning, with Cprime’s assistance, the airline group also plans to establish value stream identification workshops within the cargo unit and kick-start much-needed Agile development within the flag carrier’s payments team.

“These are changes that will improve the delivery quality and speed of our work. That will allow us to pass on greater value to our customers,” the executive sponsor explains.

Cprime will also remain on hand to provide the airline group with the knowledge and expertise it needs to independently scale its SAFe© transformation.

“As phase two wraps up, we are building the airline group’s Lean/Agile Center of Excellence,” says Bernadine, describing the initiative that will allow the airline group to scale the remaining transformation on their own by training SAFe© program consultants and consultant trainers.

“Once that is in place, Cprime will have given them complete self-sufficiency and the Agile tools they need to achieve anything,” she concludes.












Case Study #18

Company Details
Industry: Retail and eCommerce
Company Size: Over 99,000 employees; 1,100 stores in 49 states
Location: Headquartered in Wisconsin, U.S.
Products: Clothing, home goods, lifestyle products
Cprime Services:
Global Talent Services
Executive Summary
This major retailer needed to hire a Project Manager. With the help of Cprime Global Talent Services, they saw very fast turnaround times from requisition to hire — often as little as four or five business days — and most positions were filled with the first or second candidate we located as opposed to seven, eight, or even ten candidates brought in per position previously.


  
Company Overview
The client operates over 1,100 department stores across the United States. Their iconic brand was established over sixty years ago in the Midwest and they had expanded nationwide by the time they went public in the early 1990s. In 2001, they expanded online with a website that has since become a significant portion of their overall business. Over the last two decades, the retailer has experienced explosive growth, necessitating large-scale staffing requirements.

The Challenge
Over the years, the company’s rapid growth meant that traditional in-house hiring was often too slow and labor-intensive to keep up with demand. This was especially true when seeking qualified candidates for technical positions in the ever-growing IT department.

The client had been working with a staffing agency for a few years to bring in consultants with varying results. The company was investing in its eCommerce arm more than ever before, necessitating not just a greater headcount in the IT department, but a higher rate of success and lower churn than the current vendor was providing.

When a particular position became available, an employee in the same office as the hiring manager suggested contacting Cprime.

The Solution
Khursheed Irani, Head of Cprime’s Global Talent Services (GTS) had worked with one of their new hires in a previous role and they both had mutual professional respect for each other.

Job-hopping among a small number of employers is not uncommon in the retail industry. GTS often places the same candidate multiple times, hence maintaining a professional relationship that is not tied to a particular project but instead spans multiple years across various employers.

A door opens thanks to a strong past relationship
The candidate landed his second retail assignment at the above-mentioned large US retailer, but through a different consulting firm. He had always been happy with Cprime and routinely kept in touch with Khursheed.

When his manager was looking for a Release Manager for their team, he immediately recommended working with Cprime. At that time Cprime was not a preferred vendor with the large retailer, but the manager decided to give Cprime a shot.

The GTS team provided a candidate within the first 48 hours who got hired.

A new relationship expands
This impressed the hiring manager and the large retailer began shifting more of their hiring needs to Cprime, with a major focus on project and product roles. At its height, this new relationship involved 45 active consultant positions being managed through Cprime with far more total placements as individuals came and left.

In addition, Cprime’s wide range of services beyond talent acquisition has allowed for the expansion of the relationship with this client. They have worked with our DevOps experts on various projects and we were instrumental in building their mobile PMO.

The Results
Khursheed recalls, “Throughout the pre-pandemic active period, our talent acquisition specialists truly outshined the client’s previous vendor by offering very fast turnaround times from requisition to hire — often as little as four or five business days — and most positions were filled with the first or second candidate we located as opposed to seven, eight, or even ten candidates brought in per position previously.”

This level of efficiency is vital in staffing situations because it dramatically lowers the workload for client hiring managers and gets people in their seats faster so they can start actively solving problems for the company.

Khursheed concludes, “With the success we enjoyed before the pandemic and the strength of the ongoing relationship, I have no doubt we’ll be partnering with this client for a long time to come.”










Case Study #19

Company Details
Industry: Medical Device Manufacturing (Optical Imaging)
Company Size: 350 Employees
Location: United Kingdom
Products: Optical Imaging and Retinal Scanning Devices
Cprime Services:
Agile Training and Coaching
Group Training
SAFe Solutions
Executive Summary
As newer, low-cost competitors enter the medical optical imaging sector, this leading retinal scanning manufacturer partnered with Cprime to increase organizational predictability, transparency, and alignment with the Scaling Agile Framework (SAFe).

People putting sticky notes on a transparent white board
  
Company Background
Founded in 1992, this UK-based Cprime client’s innovative technology has significantly extended the efficacy of medical optical imaging. The company’s advancements in creating high-resolution retinal maps have enabled the early detection and treatment of conditions like retinal detachment. This particular ailment afflicted the founder’s son in 1990.

The manufacturer has developed its technology to provide highly-effective early detection of both ocular and wider systemic ailments. These range from early-onset glaucoma to diabetes. As a result, their cutting-edge systems have received global acknowledgment in the form of royal and medical profession awards. They have also won clinical partnerships and installations with some of the world’s most advanced medical facilities.

Achieving Predictability, Alignment, and Transparency
Few industries match the complexity of the medical device sector in terms of regulation, R&D, manufacturing, and quality control processes. In addition to these considerations, the manufacturer was facing increased international competition from developing markets.

“Despite being at the very top of its field, the company faced a wider trend affecting many western manufacturers — it needed to remain competitive with Asian manufacturers that could deliver similar products with a much lower cost base,” says Sukie Kang, a Cprime SPCT and Lean-Agile Transformation Coach. “They had to up their game and become much more effective at getting their products out the door — something they couldn’t achieve if they continued to manage projects using Gantt charts and traditional ways of working.”

Identifying the issues
The issues the company needed to address were threefold but interlinked: predictability, alignment, and transparency.

“There was no predictability of commitment. It was very difficult to determine when work would be completed, and that was affecting customer confidence,” says Kang. Consequently, that lack of predictability and inability to meet deadlines was a source of reputational risk for the organization. Unfortunately, it was also a cause of friction with its medical client base.

Also, in terms of alignment, the manufacturer’s teams were often working at cross purposes. “Their traditional way of working meant the company’s teams were operating in silos,” says Kang. “When one team’s work was passed over the wall to another team, their priorities didn’t line up because the organization lacked a shared focus.”

Simultaneously, there was a lack of transparency across all levels of the organization. “The leadership was unaware of the real challenges its teams were facing,” says Kang. “Because they were not fully aware of the current state of the work or the impediments involved they were looking over the teams’ shoulders rather than identifying and removing obstacles and establishing priorities for future work.” This resulted in employee frustration and sapped productivity.

The medical device manufacturer realized these combined issues created organizational bottlenecks. They further hindered the ability of management and the teams to collaborate, affected morale, and ultimately delayed product delivery.

Navigating the SAFe Roadmap to Effective PI Planning with Cprime
Seeking a solution, the company identified its primary strength — the lean process it used to manufacture its products.

“The company’s lean manufacturing and build team were exceptional. They had a very agile approach to adapting the laser manufacturing process to their environment, formulating solutions and rapidly affecting changes to deliver remarkable results,” recalls Stuart Griffith, Cprime SPCT and SAFe Program Consultant. “The executive team realized that same level of agility was needed to improve the research, development, and pre-manufacturing side of the business.”

Seeking SAFe ways to work
To identify a viable transformation framework, the company formed an exploratory panel consisting of a technical coordinator, a lead systems engineer, and a head of research and development. Additionally, leadership tasked the panel to attend and evaluate Implementing SAFe (Scaled Agile Framework) for Lean Enterprises, a four-day course designed for change agents intent on leveraging lean principles and agile methodologies at an organizational level.

“Cprime delivered the course, and on the strength of our experience, delivery, and reputation, the panel went back to their executive team with the confidence to promote Cprime as a partner to drive their own transformation,” says Kang. “Based on the trust we established, the executive sponsors engaged Cprime to guide that process.”

Laying lean agile foundations
Map_Small_black_coralCprime’s first step was to create a transformation roadmap leading toward the manufacturer’s first program increment (PI) planning event. In SAFe, PI planning is ceremonial — a regular, face-to-face gathering of all company teams to establish a cross-organizational agile release train (ART) and align stakeholders to a shared mission.

So Cprime’s goal was to establish PI planning to create a strong social network between the medical device manufacturer’s teams. They also wanted to match its pre-manufacturing demand to its real capacity and enable rapid decision making throughout the process. As a result, this would enable the manufacturer to adapt its processes to its business context and goals and identify cross-team dependencies and impediments at regular intervals.

 

“Now our expectations are realistic and achievable, milestones against trade show deadlines and other deliverables are being met, and, due to quality improvements, customers are reporting even higher levels of satisfaction with the products they receive.” — Executive Sponsor
 

“Preparation for the initial PI planning session required equipping everyone involved with an appropriate lean agile background,” says Kang. “We also put into place the supporting systems the manufacturer needed to track and refine its way of working — like kanban boards, team skills, and composition assessments — and how to organize its teams effectively for fast flow.”

While exchanging baseline knowledge and establishing key systems, Cprime simultaneously trained the company’s scrum master in preparation for the inaugural PI planning. To that end, Cprime was on hand throughout to promote best practices for the early PI sessions.

Results: Achievable Expectations, Quality Improvements, and Milestones Met
Despite an initial brief to train ten UK teams, executive leadership extended the scope to twelve teams and included employees based offshore in China to maintain synergy with its local workforce.

Cprime maintained a full-time presence on-site for the three-month run-up to the initial PI planning session before scaling back to an as-needed support role. In that limited time frame, the two Cprime coaches trained 80 employees across the twelve teams before reducing their role to providing periodical support over an additional two three-month PI sessions.

Seeing organizational gains
Magnifying_Glass_Medium_black_coralFor the manufacturer, the SAFe transformation yielded clear gains. In hard numbers, the company reported an increase in predictability and delivery of milestones of 85% for PI 2 up from a baseline measurement of 58% for PI 1.

According to one executive sponsor, “Now our expectations are realistic and achievable, milestones against trade show deadlines and other deliverables are being met, and, due to quality improvements, customers are reporting high levels of satisfaction with the products they receive.”

Improved employee engagement
At this point, the manufacturer noted an improvement in team morale, communication, and engagement in terms of alignment and transparency.

“Challenges and impediments that the teams experienced are now addressed proactively by people who have the power to change the system,” says Griffith.

 

“As a result of the transformation, the company’s employees now feel they have control over their work, the flexibility to adapt, and the knowledge their obstacles are being acknowledged and addressed.” — Stuart Griffith, SAFe Program Consultant, Cprime
 

Acknowledging that no transformation is ever complete and that lean agile is an ever-evolving process, Kang reflects on what defines a successful engagement: “As Cprime coaches our role is to make our clients self-sufficient and ourselves redundant,” he says. “We achieved that here by building trust between the company’s managers and engineers and its leaders and teams on the ground.”












Case Study #20


Company Details
Industry: Commercial real estate
Company Size: 4,400 Employees
Location: Headquartered in New York, United States, with locations worldwide
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Custom Development
Strategic Consulting (Atlassian Confluence)
Strategic Consulting (Atlassian Jira)
Executive Summary
This large commercial real estate development company had grown very quickly in the years leading up to the decision to go public. As a result, systems and processes required a significant overhaul in preparation for compliance requirements under the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) regulations that would become binding on day one following the IPO. They tapped Cprime — a partner for several years prior — to use their existing Jira and Confluence systems to accomplish this. And they did.


  
Overview
Cprime has been working with this company for several years. Specifically, they rely on us to handle:

Licensing for their Atlassian products
Managed hosting
Custom development
Consultation around Atlassian solutions
As the company began preparing for their IPO, however, we deprioritized all other work so we could focus solely on developing a strategy ensuring the organization could achieve SOX compliance.

In the months preceding the IPO, a lot of internal changes occurred. The CEO resigned, and leadership carried out extensive reorganization and downsizing to bolster a sagging balance sheet. They knew that, with that situation in the recent past, SOX auditors would be especially diligent as soon as the company went public.

So, Cprime Solutions Architect Clayton Chancey — who was previously directly involved in Atlassian consultation and custom development at the company — took on the responsibility of developing their SOX compliance strategy for the Atlassian suite in partnership with leadership and dedicated SOX consultants. He served as Product Owner leading a team of six Atlassian experts, and coordinated custom development work carried out by the Cprime Studios team based in Ukraine.

“Our goal was twofold,” Clayton recalls. “We needed to revamp the setup of one of their core systems — Atlassian Jira — to make it SOX compliant. And, they wanted to actually manage their compliance activities using Jira as their project management solution. So, we needed to help develop the overall compliance strategy and configure Jira and Confluence to support that.”

The Solution
John Lucas, Cprime Solutions Architect explains, “They contacted Cprime to take this on because they already recognized us as the Atlassian experts. It’s commonplace for companies to bring in compliance consultants to provide general guidance — and they did — but they could only offer blanket recommendations for how all apps and systems should function to comply with SOX regulations. They weren’t familiar enough with Jira to offer any practical guidance. We could.”

The Cprime team took a broad view to ensure they set up Jira to accommodate all SOX requirements. Jira will also efficiently manage compliance activities across the organization. So the team needed to creatively consider:

Onboarding and offboarding
Access control
Segregation of duties and approvals
Reporting and auditability
To accomplish their dual objective, Clayton, John, and the team made Jira a central hub. It could be used to track and coordinate auditable activities across multiple systems. This required custom integration development to connect Jira to various systems including those used by Finance and HR. Internal workflows and custom automation ensure that the activity that occurs within Jira is, itself, compliant. At the same time, activity coordinated with other systems is thoroughly tracked and reportable by means of simple dashboards and automated reports that can be pulled on demand for both internal and external auditing purposes.

Additionally, all the activity occurring within Jira could be tied to a dedicated space on Confluence to facilitate documentation and collaboration while maintaining the proper SOX-compliant access controls so no aspect of the financial reporting data could be compromised.

The Results
The company went public and, soon after, our solutions helped them achieve full SOX compliance. Shortly thereafter, external auditors conducted a thorough investigation and confirmed this designation. Needless to say, this outcome more than satisfied our client.

“Maintaining and validating compliance is always going to be an ongoing process,” Clayton concludes, “so we continue to partner with the client to administrate and optimize the Jira configurations and develop scripts and integrations as needed. But, they did the heavy lifting upfront.

“Cprime’s key differentiator in this project was the well-rounded solution we were able to provide with a particular expertise in the Atlassian solutions that other compliance consultants simply couldn’t match.”












Case Study #21

Company Details
Industry: Luxury Retail and eCommerce
Company Size: 1,800 Employees
Location: Manhattan, New York. 45 retail branches in the US and Canada
Products: Luxury Goods, Designer Clothing
Cprime Services:
IT Service Management
Jira Software and Jira Service Management
Executive Summary
This internationally recognized luxury retail icon turned to Cprime to modernize its failing legacy service management infrastructure with turnkey Jira and Jira Service Management portals. The resulting ITSM implementation enhanced the teams’ service efficacy and reduced the number of tickets created


  
Overview
This high-profile Cprime client is an American institution with a rich history dating back to 1924 when it first opened the doors on its flagship midtown Manhattan store. Since those early days, the store has come to define the American luxury retail market. It is a fashion destination and an iconic brand synonymous with quality, style, and life’s finer offerings.

From its New York beginnings, the store has expanded to 45 upscale retail locations in the United States and Canada. It has also established a strong ecommerce platform, making its trademark designer goods and luxury items available to consumers worldwide. As a result, it has gained significant investor attention and a multibillion-dollar valuation for its Initial Public Offering (IPO) potential.

The Challenge
Plugging the Cracks — Rapidly Replacing an Ineffective Legacy Solution with Jira and Jira Service Management
While brick-and-mortar locations have their place, the future of retail is in creating a holistic ecosystem. The goal is a seamless and wholly integrated physical store and online business model. Accordingly, this was clear to the store’s parent organization. Consequently, it wanted to simplify its portfolio by restructuring the store’s operations into a stand-alone entity suitable for public investment. With discussions of a high-stakes IPO, the store was under pressure to rapidly establish its service management infrastructure.

“The store wanted to improve its payroll and tech services, the company IT support desk, first,” explains Kenyon Barnette, Cprime Senior Atlassian Consultant. “It was a tight deadline because they wanted their new service management and ticketing systems available the moment their split from the parent organization became effective.”

 

“The teams have all seen the value of being able to visualize the work, visualize the requests that are coming in and be able to track it and manage them outside of their email inbox or Slack. Cprime will continue to work with their teams to create the forms and portals they need to make sure nothing in the organization falls through the cracks.” — Kenyon Barnette, Cprime Senior Atlassian Consultant
 

In addition to the change in ownership structure, the store had another, more practical, concern — its existing service management solution was difficult to use for its employees and service personnel alike.

“The platform was very cumbersome,” says Barnette. “For their agents, it was difficult to get around or work through. The store’s staff would take one look at the forms and just send an email, so the agents were getting off-platform requests and having people call them or send stuff via Slack or Teams. It frustrated them because the whole point of having a platform was to have everything funnel into it.”

The store’s employees were circumventing the platform in favor of using side channels. This resulted in too many requests falling through the cracks, getting lost, forgotten, or ignored.

The Solution
Discovering Processes and Streamlining Information Collection with Cprime
Based on a relationship established during a previous engagement, the store reached out to Cprime. They initially discussed implementing Jira and Jira Service Management for its Payroll and Technical Services. The goal was to establish a system pilot to allow it to efficiently automate, prioritize, and resolve critical service requests. It also wanted to improve collaboration between its other employees and the service teams. Additionally, there was a focus on improving the teams’ overall efficiency.

“The payroll and tech service teams are very lean. With around ten people each, they serve over 1,800 employees and contractors,” says Barnette. “Receiving an effective new system was an enormous deal for them.”

Discovery Sessions
The two-person Cprime team began the Jira implementation by conducting discovery sessions. They gathered information and feedback from their primary stakeholders — the teams themselves.

“They were the people who would work directly with the tickets created in Jira,” says Barnette. “We wanted to understand who their audience was, how they structured their teams in terms of specialization, and how they wanted to organize requests as they came in.”

Refining the Process
The Cprime team set out to refine the information collection process. Then they identified the types of requests the teams were handling and understanding their core ways of working.

“We worked to identify exactly what information they needed to handle every request with minimal friction back and forth. Then we created streamlined forms that captured all the necessary information,” says Barnette. “It is all a matter of striking a balance. As we saw with their previous system, if a form is too complex, the user will seek a simpler way to communicate. If a form is too simple, the agents spend even more time trying to pull the information they need out of the user.”

Cprime and the store’s teams iterated twice weekly for six weeks. After that, they created the forms, structure, and workflow necessary to take the system live.

“On the back end, or agent view, the team’s specializations within their groups came into play when we created the queues,” says Barnette. “If someone handled hardware support, system access, or providing payroll benefit information, they’d have their own queue showing them only the tickets that they needed to see.”

The Results
Project Success and a Future Roadmap
Working with Cprime, the payroll and tech services teams took their pilot Jira and Jira Service Management portals live after only six weeks from engagement to implementation.

 

“It is all a matter of striking a balance. Cprime worked to identify exactly what information they needed to handle every request with minimal friction. Then we created streamlined forms that captured all the necessary information.” — Kenyon Barnette, Cprime Senior Atlassian Consultant
 

“The users had system access and the teams were fielding requests by day two,” recalls Barnette. “From the outset, everyone was much happier with the new Jira tooling.”

To reduce the drag on adoption by users still resorting to emails to report issues, the Cprime team also created an autoresponder to direct them through the correct process.

Besides improving the workflows and processes of the store’s service management teams, the Jira implementation also tied into its existing Confluence knowledge base. The connection further enhanced the teams’ service efficacy and reduced the number of tickets created.

“When you use Confluence with Jira Service Management, you enable people with knowledge base articles,” explains Barnette. “As they type to describe their problem in the form, Service Management recommends articles in Confluence that help them solve the issue on their own. It is called ticket deflection. They loved it.”

With the obvious success of its first Jira Service Management projects, the store has extended the engagement to further streamline its internal business processes. It is currently establishing service management portals for its Information Security, Networking, and DevOps teams.

“The teams have all seen the value of being able to visualize the work, visualize the requests that are coming in and be able to track and manage them outside of their email inbox or Slack,” says Barnette. “Cprime will continue to work with their teams to create the forms and portals they need to make sure nothing in the organization falls through the cracks.”











Case Study #22

Company Details
Industry: International Finance and Banking
Company Size: 65,000 Employees
Location: London, UK with regional offices worldwide
Products: Asset management, personal and commercial banking, credit cards, investment management, mortgage loans, wealth management
Cprime Services:
Agile Training and Coaching
Group training
Technical Coaching
Executive Summary
Under increasing pressure from disruptive, digitally-native cloud financial services, this long-standing UK banking institution partnered with Cprime to increase organizational agility and reduce its time to market on new product offerings. has allowed the bank to scale up development initiatives and effectively manage dependencies between its teams to deliver new products quickly.


  
Overview
This London-based institution is one of the country’s most well-known household brands. Its name has been synonymous with financial services for generations. As a primary clearing house and the largest retail bank in England, Scotland, and Wales, the bank serves over 30 million customers through its 1300 branches and extensive ATM network.

The Challenge: Meeting Modern Consumer Expectations While Maintaining Traditional Values
A pedigree dating back centuries is beneficial in terms of brand recognition, but in a volatile marketplace affected by emergent technology, words like traditional and legacy often describe strategic disadvantages.

“Faced with universal adoption of mobile technology and cloud-based financial services, the bank was falling behind new, digitally native financial organizations disrupting the marketplace,” explains Robert Hill, Cprime’s Training Lead. “The bank had to modernize product services, but it was a traditional organization dependent on old technology. It had legacy on-premises IT ecosystems, services, and ways of working.”

Seeking the digital path
Because it needs to remain competitive, the bank needed a strategic system of transformation that would put it on a digital path. It also needed to attract modern consumers without jeopardizing over 200 years of hard-earned trust within its existing consumer base.

 

“Four years later, we are still delivering. We hold quarterly training as part of the bank’s onboarding process. The courses evolve with each session, and the lessons we have learned from the partnership improve our interactions with other clients.” — Robert Hill, Training Lead, Cprime
 

“To challenge the market disruptors, the bank needed to change,” says Hill. “But it wasn’t a start-up—a change meant re-engineering entire systems and platforms, and that entailed repurposing and reeducating thousands of employees towards modern, agile ways of working. The competition was steps ahead.”

At first, the bank’s internal teams identified key areas for change and established an internal agile program to align its key teams and departments with the digital financial marketplace. It had a transformation strategy but lacked an effective partner to help put it into place. Additionally, previous transformation attempts had met with limited success.

“For many years, the bank had a clear driver to modernize and become a proactive, productive, and adaptive organization relevant to the new consumer base,” says Hill. “They’d tried to affect change, but never got traction. They’d always gone back to the old ways of working. This time, however, the stakes were higher.”

The Solution: Re-engineering systems, tools, and ways of working with Cprime
Training_Medium_black_coralRecognizing it lacked the in-house capability to drive transformation on an organizational scale, the bank turned to Cprime in 2018.

“The bank wasn’t interested in agile for agile’s sake, but a full agile reset. That meant re-engineering, modeling new systems and tools, changing how its teams worked, and even the customers they were working for,” Hill relates. “The leadership engaged Cprime to provide the capacity it lacked. Besides coaching and training expertise, we had an established reputation for success. We brought an external perspective and an industry-standard view of the new way of working.”

Establishing a common language
Cprime began by building scalable scrum master and product owner courses to provide key team members with the core skills and techniques required to drive change. The training team adapted the certified Scrum Alliance role-based curriculum to share a common vocabulary and goals. This also augmented the bank’s in-house Agile Fundamentals program.

“The off-the-shelf approach wasn’t good enough. The bank had its own context for the training, a particular language it used to describe the organizational makeup of their new teams,” says Hill. “To meet their requirements, we worked with the Head of Transformation and transformation team to understand their goals and expected outcomes. From there, we co-created a set of learning objectives, consulting with stakeholders and guiding expectations.”

Gaining insights and building trust
The Cprime team created two pilot courses which they delivered to select cohorts within the organization. To build relationships, establish trust, and gain insights, the Cprime coaches embedded themselves within the cohorts and developed each course via a series of iterations, adapting the curriculum to take into account trainee input. The preparation time for each course totaled six to eight weeks. Even accounting for the logistics of a mass rollout, Cprime began full-scale training in under 10 weeks.

 

“From the teams’ perspective, we see a much stronger sense of ownership from stakeholders at every level. The effects of the training have trickled down to create empowered individuals in every role. The work environment is less a chain of command and more a cohesive network of people delivering value.” — Robert Hill, Training Lead, Cprime
 

“We developed the training using the same agile mindset we were looking to instill in the bank’s teams,” says Hill. “If we had used a traditional delivery method and waited until we had everything perfect, it would have taken months longer. We would also have missed opportunities for valuable feedback throughout the process.”

The Results: A Cohesive Network of People Delivering Value
The program’s effects rapidly became apparent throughout the organization as the training gained momentum across multiple teams.

“From the teams’ perspective, we see a much stronger sense of ownership from stakeholders at every level,” says Hill. “The effects of the training have trickled down to create an empowered set of individuals in every role. The work environment is now less a chain of command and more a cohesive network of people delivering value.”

A level playing field
The change has allowed the bank to scale up development initiatives and effectively manage dependencies between its teams to deliver new products quickly. From an organizational point of view, the bank’s leadership had the teams’ buy-in and the oversight it needed to compete in the digital service market.

“The training empowered teams to challenge the industry disruptors,” says Hill. “They have bottom-up agility with top-down intent.”

In the first two years of the engagement, the Cprime team trained around 2,000 product owners and scrum masters to lead the bank’s teams and drive its business objectives. Because of the program’s success and continued improvement, the engagement is ongoing.

“Four years later, we are still delivering. We hold training every quarter as part of the bank’s onboarding process,” says Hill. “The courses evolve with each session, and the lessons we’ve learned from the partnership improve our interactions with other clients.”











Case Study #23

Company Details
Industry: Internet, Telecommunications, Mobile
Company Size: 100K+ employees across 21 countries; over 300 million customers
Location: Headquartered in the UK
Products: Fixed and mobile telephony, Broadband, Digital TV, IPTV, IoT
Cprime Services:
Agile training and coaching
Embedded Scrum Masters
Executive Summary
A large telecom pioneer had many teams and departments across the organization at various levels of agile maturity and many more that were still working using traditional project management or waterfall development methods. Teams were not aligned internally, silos proliferated, and visibility into the work was lacking. With the help of Cprime training experts and embedded scrum masters to lead the change, they saw improvements in visibility, elimination of siloes, and improved team morale.


  
Laying the foundation
In the past, the departments that served each of the organization’s more than twenty markets worldwide employed their own cybersecurity teams. So each worked in their own way, which was “good enough” for many years. But then, leadership decided to consolidate all their cybersecurity resources under one centralized umbrella. Consequently, this pivotal decision highlighted pain points and led to a far-reaching agile transformation.

The organization’s Security and DevSecOps stakeholder noted, “As we were working toward consolidation, it became clear that the different teams were siloed—both from each other and from other teams and departments that relied on them. Overall, with different ways of working and no set framework they could all follow, it was proving difficult to align all of Cybersecurity.”

So, Dr. Sheridan took the lead in pursuing the means to standardize the working methods and establish a unified framework.

“We knew, based on what some teams had already accomplished, that we wanted Cyber to adopt Agile,” she noted. “And, we settled on SAFe as the most appropriate framework for scaling those Agile practices across the entire department.”

They contacted Cprime UK to help guide and facilitate from this point.

This was no small feat. The Cybersecurity team consists of over 800 employees located in more than twenty countries. So, Dr. Sheridan and Cprime UK set about creating a long-term strategic roadmap, a lengthy white paper around Agile transformation, and numerous presentations to various business units and executive stakeholders. And, they hit upon a valuable strategy to ensure the scaled Agile approach they were developing would be sustainable.

Steps to success
Security Champions
“The first step was to establish what I called Security Champions,” Sheridan said. “These were individuals in each Cyber team that would be trained and coached as early adopters and advocates for Agile and SAFe principles we wanted the teams to adopt.”

These individuals helped “rally the troops” in a sense, advocating for the value of change and helping identify areas where change would lead to vast improvements in each team’s work outcomes. For example, Sheridan said, “We could see products getting to market faster if we made the move to Agile and SAFe. It would cut down on overly long approval processes and time-consuming meetings because everyone was following a set framework. Everyone would have visibility into the work. Faster speed to market would lead directly to innovation and increased revenue.”

As with any significant change, there was some initial pushback. But eventually, the various Cyber teams became more aligned in their desire to make a move.

Gerhard Sutherland, a Lean Agile Coach who worked closely with Dr. Sheridan throughout the transformation process, notes, “One of the most important aspects of this kind of transformation is having the right people in the right positions to really bring everything to fruition. That applies to both the teams undergoing transformation and the trainers and coaches we were providing to guide them. In some cases, we needed to pivot and swap out resources to ensure we were providing the very best help based on each team’s unique needs.”

SAFe training classes
Representatives from the teams (in addition to the Security Champions) and members of Cybersecurity management and leadership attended three-day SAFe training classes. Then, Cprime coaches helped disseminate that knowledge across the teams.

Sheridan recalls, “This needed to be a hands-on, practical process. Just training alone was not going to cut it, so the Cprime coaches were right there, hands-on, teaching and showing the teams how to follow these new methods.”

A strategic roadmap
At that point, the team revisited and clarified the initial strategic roadmap. Sheridan and Sutherland collaborated to develop a plan to present to executives for budgeting and strategic purposes. This included a significant effort to replace all the disparate slides and spreadsheets that various teams relied upon with one centralized set of documents that provided a highly visual and engaging view of where they were headed.

Farooq Mohammed, another Lean Agile Coach who has worked primarily as an embedded Scrum Master, explained, “This level of visualization and strategic explanation was integral to achieving buy-in across the teams and eliminating the last of the team members’ hesitance. They could see where they individually fit into the proposed strategic initiatives, which was powerful.”

The Results
As it often is, the transformation was a slow and steady process. With preliminary work beginning in late 2019 and Cprime getting involved in January 2020, the pandemic also impacted how the transformation progressed. But, by June of 2021, the Cybersecurity teams had:

Established a Lean Agile Center of Excellence (LACE)
Mapped their value streams
Set up Agile Release Trains (ARTs) and Planning Increments (PIs)
And built a solid foundation for Lean Portfolio Management (LPM)
Sheridan noted, “The visibility into the work has improved dramatically. Whereas it used to require lots of long status meetings, now it’s just an ongoing, almost real-time process.”

Mohammed stated, “We can see that the teams are no longer functioning in silos as they were before. They’re working together across teams, collaborating more freely.”

Sutherland agrees. “It’s also clear that the teams are working so well together because people have truly taken ownership of the work. Rather than just assigned tasks, everyone can see where what they’re doing fits into the bigger picture of organizational strategy. That’s a great motivator, and it promotes collaboration and cooperation.”

“And, maybe most importantly, the team members are just happier working together this way,” Sheridan concludes.

The engagement isn’t over. Going forward, the company intends to:

Scale the use of Agile and SAFe to other parts of the organization
Explore participatory budgeting
Expand and solidify the LPM practice
Dive deeper into automation at all stages of the workflows
And much more
And Cprime UK will be there to support those efforts and beyond.













Case Study #24

Company Details
Industry: Diagnostic Imaging Device Manufacturing
Company Size: 66,000 Employees
Location: United Kingdom, Germany
Products: Diagnostic imaging devices — radiography (X-rays), ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Cprime Services:
Agile Training and Coaching
Group Training
Executive Summary
With teams on multiple continents struggling to predictably deliver a complex product, this top medical imaging manufacturer turned to Cprime to align its teams with SAFe© agile ways of working. With the help of Cprime trainers, they significantly improved transparency, delivery rates, and employee satisfaction.


  
Overview
With over 178 years in the field of medical device technology, this Cprime client has been manufacturing medical imaging devices for 125 years — its first commercial diagnostic imaging product was released in 1896, one year after the x-ray tube was invented by Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen.

Since its earliest days, this top-three manufacturer has remained at the forefront of the medtech manufacturing industry; it currently maintains a 23% share of a global market valued at US $40 billion annually. Further, its diagnostic imaging devices are commonplace in hospitals worldwide. These include radiography (X-rays), ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

The Challenge
The manufacturer had development partners, manufacturing and R&D facilities spread across Germany, Portugal, the United States, United Kingdom, and Asia. It also had regulatory concerns in every market it occupied. As a result, it wanted to align teams involved in the development of MRI machines across interconnected teams.

“It is an incredibly large organization,” says Stuart Griffith, Cprime SAFe© Program Consultant. “If you look across all of their value delivery trains, suppliers, and researchers the number of people involved in the end-to-end delivery of every MRI product totals in the five-figure range.” By comparison, few companies work at that level of scale and complexity across similar distances.

Creating Consistent, Connected Ways of Working Across Multinational and Multidisciplinary Teams
Firstly, maintaining consistent, connected ways of working across its multinational and multidisciplinary teams was the manufacturer’s greatest challenge. Secondly, the different departments involved in the manufacture of a single MRI product were working in silos. Consequently, there was a disconnect causing a cascade of delays across work units that affected the product’s time to market.

“You’re only as fast as your slowest runner when you’re building a complex product,” says Sukie Kang, Cprime SPCT & Lean-Agile Transformation Coach. “The manufacturer’s German operations had already adopted a lean agile methodology towards developing and manufacturing the hardware, but one of their key UK development teams was still using traditional ways of working and Gantt charts to remain organized.”

The manufacturer wanted to improve coordination between the European and UK MRI development teams to better integrate with dependent teams. However, there were other issues to consider. Transforming the highly specialized UK team would take more than implementing new processes. The Cprime team had to affect fundamental cultural changes within the manufacturer’s leadership and team members.

“Most people on the team had been there for ten or even twenty years. Over that time some had not evolved their ways of working,” says Griffith. “Because they were technically and academically oriented, they were initially quite resistant to shifting the way they approached problem solving.”

The Solution: Cprime as a SAFe© Agile Gold Partner
Above all, it based the decision on Cprime’s proven track record as SAFe© Agile Gold Partners. Particularly because of their experience in transforming hardware manufacturing and development processes at scale in the UK. Specifically, the Cprime brief was to begin training, coaching, and consulting with the UK team to educate people in lean agile processes, encourage transparency, and reduce delay-to-delivery. The engagement involved helping the UK team transition to a more agile form of product delivery and improving their communication with the European teams and organizational coordination layer.

 

“Improvements in transparency have resulted in a real understanding of the work to be done and an adjustment in the organization’s expectations. The teams are much more engaged in their work, and our recent Inspect and Adapt event proved that they are solving problems and creating realistic planning horizons.” — Executive Sponsor
 

“All the MRI teams needed a consistent way of working to effectively integrate and deliver all of these systems together,” says Griffith. “As the only outlier still dependent on traditional processes, the UK team was under pressure to adapt to the common agile framework and use that framework to attain better transparency.” The organization needed a way to understand what was causing delays, how they could correct those delays to speed up product delivery, and, finally, have the confidence and supporting process in place to establish and meet realistic goals.

“They had to start speaking the same language as the rest of the solution train and improve their speed, quality, and predictability,” Kang adds.

Planning for a successful transformation
Using their own agile methodology, the two-person Cprime team began by creating a transformation plan. This involved forming internal teams, ensuring everyone from the UK team leadership was clear on their roles, and establishing all the activities necessary to conduct the first program increment (PI) planning event. It was a planning cycle the UK team would go on to hold independently once every twelve weeks.

“The first cohort of people we trained were the internal change agents. The second cohort is always the leadership — it’s a proven and successful pattern,” says Kang. “Transformations fail if leadership is not trained or engaged in the process.”

So Cprime provided the UK team with intensive coaching in the run-up to the first PI planning session.

“We were very hands-on with coaching and support, helping them uncover and formulate solutions to their challenges,” says Griffith. “We tapered off our involvement as their scrum master, release train engineer (RTE), architects, and team members began communicating effectively and independently solving their issues in later PI iterations.”

Overcoming resistance
The Cprime team encountered some push-back and resistance due to the UK team’s long-entrenched culture. So they created ad hoc workshops based on real-world cases to challenge the status quo.

“We would run additional sessions using case studies from similar industries demonstrating where their peers had gone down similar paths,” says Kang. “We wanted to make them understand they had the ability to be proactive. Rather than saying ‘It has always been like this,’ they had the power and responsibility to say, ‘This is unacceptable. What can we do to improve it?’”

The Results: The Right Cadence to Meet Organizational Goals
Over the course of nine months encompassing three complete PI planning cycles, the UK teams saw substantial improvements. The changes affected both the manufacturer’s leadership and the UK team’s morale and productivity.

“Improvements in transparency have resulted in real understanding of the work to be done and an adjustment in the organization’s expectations,” says an executive sponsor. “The teams are much more engaged in their work, and our recent Inspect and Adapt event proved that they are solving problems and creating realistic planning horizons.”

The UK team’s delivery rates also improved significantly. Where the team overshot 42% of their deadlines in the first PI session, they reduced that figure to 15% by the end of session two. An internal survey reports greater employee satisfaction and a greater feeling of control over their workload as a result of the Cprime coaching and agile methodology.

In addition to meeting their own goals, the UK had aligned with teams across three continents.

“Everyone was working at the same cadence. The UK had the same heartbeat as its global counterparts,” concludes Kang. “That just made things easier for everybody. It supported the whole organization’s time-to-market goals, its quality goals, and improved its predictability, resulting in a more satisfied customer base.











Case Study #25

Company Details
Industry: International Finance and Banking
Company Size: 83,000 Employees
Location: London, UK With Regional Offices Worldwide
Products: Asset management, personal and commercial banking, credit cards, investment management, mortgage loans, wealth management
Cprime Services:
Group Training
Technical Coaching
Agile Training and Coaching
Executive Summary
As new technology and innovative financial products disrupted the traditional banking ecosystem, this major UK Bank turned to Cprime to promote Agile change. With the help of Cprime Learning experts, they saw tremendous improvements in throughput and testing coverage.


  
Overview
This Cprime client has demonstrated a commitment to innovation that has seen it through almost 350 years of consistent growth.

The bank’s portfolio continues to expand as it embraces emergent technologies. These include quantum computing, blockchain, smart contracts, and developments in machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI). As a result of its dedication to developing tech, today the bank has an ever-evolving portfolio of services that include retail, commercial, wholesale, and investment banking, as well as private banking and wealth management.

The numbers tell the story. In 2021, the bank reported annual revenue of US $27.17 billion and assets under management totaling US $586 billion. It has 83,500 employees spanning 40 countries globally.

Out With the Old—Adapting a Global Enterprise to Agile Ways of Working
Fintech and the international banking industry are driven by a series of innovations in computing and software development. They are also all about the marriage of financial services and information technology. The smartphone, however, changed the way everyone from institutions to individuals conducted their financial affairs. Overnight, startups and established tech players like Paypal, Google, and Apple took the once-exclusive payments sector mobile. The bank needed to react quickly to remain current and competitive.

“It was a time of change; dedicated and more adaptable forces were entering the financial marketplace and they were able to release technical products and services in a much more rapid and innovative way,” explains Alex Gray, Cprime Lean Agile Coach & Trainer.

In this disrupted tech landscape, the bank’s size and established processes were working against it. Consequently, management realized they needed to move to a more Agile way of working throughout the entire organization. They wanted to accelerate the way the bank delivered value to remain competitive. This also helped them meet both business objectives and shareholder expectations.

“There is a huge amount of innovation going on at the moment, and companies that do not change will not survive,” summarized the executive sponsor in charge of the bank’s technical development.

Cprime, an Agile Transformation Partner Capable of Developing, Scaling, and Transferring Knowledge
The bank was prepared for change. It had already developed and tested its Agile Change Lifecycle (ACL) framework in key business units. The issue, however, was putting that framework into practice universally. They needed to stitch together the “islands of Agile excellence” the ACL team had established during the proof of concept. To achieve that, the bank needed an Agile transformation partner capable of developing, scaling, and delivering the knowledge. For that, they turned to Cprime.

“The organization’s ACL team were very knowledgeable — we weren’t teaching them,” says Gray explaining the nature of the engagement. “Cprime’s role was purely to design, build, and deliver the training to their people across multiple business units, across multiple geographies. They had the expertise, but with their current resources, they couldn’t transmit it to tens of thousands of people worldwide.”

Agile training developed through Agile methods
Gray and the Cprime team began by employing Agile methodologies to create the training that would facilitate the transformation. It started with a single course.

“We held initial workshops with the bank’s ACL group to understand the scope of the roles, the skills, priorities, course objectives, and learning outcomes they expected. Then we sprinted and reviewed, iteratively developing the course with their input,” recalls Gray. “When that was done, we reviewed the pilot with the executive sponsors and added their feedback for the final iteration.” With its initial resources, the two-person Cprime team delivered a new course, complete with supporting materials, in just under one month.

 

“All of the ACL training material we produced encouraged personal growth in addition to focusing on business outcomes. We upskilled teams in Agile techniques and practices that would be useful in their current and future roles.” -Alex Gray, Cprime Lean Agile Coach & Trainer
 

Meeting client demand across continents
In addition to creating the coursework, Cprime was responsible for the knowledge transfer. “On the learning and development logistics side of things, we collected demand data regarding where their people were, how many to expect in each location, and when they would receive the training,” says Gray. “We also established how many trainers we would need to bring on and where to locate them.”

Once that was taken care of, it was a matter of recruitment and getting the trainers up to speed on the new framework as it evolved alongside the bank’s developing objectives.

“We recruited trainers from multiple sources, vetting and quality checking each candidate. Then we designed a straightforward pairing, or “train the trainer,” approach to bring up each new trainer’s skills and familiarize them with the ACL coursework,” says Gray. “First, an expert trainer ran the course, then we would flip that around and run it again with the expert observing and offering feedback to ensure each new associate trainer had mastered the materials.” This allowed Cprime to move incrementally from course creation to delivering ACL sessions at scale in two months.

Organizational transformation
Over 18 months, Cprime consequently produced eleven bespoke courses for different roles and practices to support the bank’s ACL framework. The Cprime team also recruited, qualified, and managed a total of 43 Lean-Agile associates. All told, they conducted ACL training with bank employees in business units from twelve countries across four continents. The countries covered included England, Scotland, Lithuania, Ukraine, Czech Republic, South Africa, Australia, Singapore, China, India, USA, and Israel.

“Cprime was able to scale out the delivery faster than the bank could accommodate,” remembers Gray. “They had the desire and demand to roll it out, but their internal logistics weren’t able to match our pace.” The sticking point was the in-person sessions and the number of locales involved. “Everything was face to face, there was no Zoom or video conferencing. All of the classes were in-room, highly interactive, two- or three-day sessions,” recalls Gray.

The phase one ACL rollout had a far-reaching influence within the organization. “Within the first year, we had the equivalent of 800+ teams working with the ACL approach,” reports the initiative’s executive sponsor. “We’re pleased with the scale and pace of adoption and at the same time we are well aware that this is just the beginning, that lasting culture change takes years.”

Delivering business objectives and forging relationships
In terms of its transformation goals, with its new ways of working the bank reported a 300 percent increase in development throughput, which the bank determined by comparing its baseline average to the number of post-training stories completed per month, per app. After attending ACL training, the bank’s developers also reduced code complexity by 50 percent with a corresponding 50 percent increase in testing coverage.

“For the past six months, more than half of our strategic applications now deploy business value to production at least once every four weeks,” the sponsor adds. “From our surveys, we can also see that those teams working with an Agile approach are happier.”

At the end of the 18-month rollout, satisfaction with the transformation cut both ways. Above all, the results of the working relationship between Cprime and the bank exceeded the expectations of everyone involved.

“One of the real successes of the engagement was having that rapport with the bank and working collaboratively with them in an Agile way to deliver such widespread change,” concludes Gray. “The fact that we maintain that strong relationship, and continue to work with them whenever they have new coursework to be developed, says it all.”












Case study #26

Company Details
Industry: IT, software development
Company Size: Over 1,400 employees serving over 1,600 client organizations
Location: Headquartered in San Francisco, CA, USA
Products: iPaaS platform and related services
Cprime Services:
Development team augmentation via Cprime Studios
DevOps transformation
QA automation training
Executive Summary
MuleSoft was growing quickly and needed to accelerate its time-to-market for each new release. They turned to Cprime Studios to attack the problem with a two-pronged approach.


  
Overview
MuleSoft is a software company headquartered in San Francisco, California, that provides integration software solutions for connecting applications, data, and devices using Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). According to Forrester, MuleSoft users realize a 445 percent ROI within three years while freeing up 90 percent of the time their developers spend on maintaining APIs and integrations. Additionally, the solution has been recognized numerous times as a leader in the Integration Platform as a Service (iPaSS) space.

The Challenge
However, the company was experiencing accelerated growth. Thus, leaders realized their existing development process was no longer keeping pace with the feature release schedule they needed to delight customers and remain competitive in a growing industry.

Their flagship product, the Anypoint Platform, had grown and matured a lot since its introduction in 2006. As a result, the complex system sported numerous interdependencies that were increasingly difficult to track and support. Also, testing the system could sometimes take six to eight weeks for each feature release.

The Solution
While adding headcount to the QA team worked to some extent, it was not sufficient to resolve the situation. They reached out to the experienced team at Cprime to help.

During an initial assessment of the situation, Cprime consultants noted a waterfall-style and highly manual QA process that slowed their otherwise Agile workflow significantly. QA was only beginning their testing once they completed all the coding for any given feature. As a result, feedback from QA might not get back to the developers until code had already been merged and they were on to something new.

Goals going in
The Cprime team devised the following goals for the engagement:

Significantly decrease the reliance on manual testing and eliminate manual regression testing.
Reorganize the waterfall-style cooperation between developers and testers, allowing them to work on the same features at the same time.
Advance the testing performance so that each feature works as expected immediately after merging.
Decrease the release cycle time and manage the development process to ensure a predictable time to release.
A two-pronged approach
To accomplish these goals, the Cprime team took a two-pronged approach:

Augmenting MuleSoft’s existing development and QA team with an additional thirteen frontend developers, four QA and test automation engineers, and two project managers.
Develop a more efficient DevOps-based testing process that would speed the time to release and train the MuleSoft team to carry it out.
Team augmentation
By augmenting the development and QA organizations at MuleSoft, experts from Cprime Studios were able to concentrate on solving the problem without MuleSoft’s existing team falling behind on their ongoing schedule. The Cprime team:

Unified the UI components library
Implemented UI components across the integrations platform
Migrated the platform UI from an outdated React framework to a newer and higher-performing Angular framework
Maintained and supported the more mature parts of the platform
Developed modules from scratch
Created a new codebase
Implemented a new automated QA testing process and trained the MuleSoft team to make the most of it
Automated QA testing
The new automated testing procedure brought QA closer to the developers and encouraged closer collaboration. They would now work on the same feature simultaneously, defining clear acceptance criteria before development began and running acceptance scenarios before each merge, validating each feature’s adequacy against customer requirements and developer feedback. This new approach allowed them to release a new fully-tested and compatible feature every two weeks.

Three layers of testing were introduced:

Completely automated testing scenarios
Partly-automated testing cases that have to be verified manually
Minimal manual testing
Automated reporting was also introduced to ensure everyone on the team stayed on the same page about results and performance. The new process also improved bug documentation and acceptance testing in Jira.
illustration

The Results
Since this engagement began, the program has scaled to several in-house teams at MuleSoft. They’ve seen the benefits of a more collaborative, DevOps-focused process:

Every two weeks, a fully-tested and functional feature is released.
Time-to-market has accelerated from several months to just two weeks.
Unit, functional, and regression testing has now reached over 80 percent of the platform code due to the efficiency of automated testing.
Feedback from the customer has increased significantly, offering developers faster and more meaningful insights into user expectations.
The team is now incorporating more advanced continuous deployment practices.
If you’d like to see similar results in your organization, contact Cprime Studios today.








Case Study #27

Company Details
Industry: Internet, Telecommunications, Mobile
Company Size: 105,000 employees across 21 countries; over 300 million customers
Location: Headquartered in the UK
Products: Fixed and mobile telephony, Broadband, Digital TV, IPTV, IoT
Cprime Services:
DevSecOps Consulting
DevSecOps Training and Coaching
Executive Summary
The company has focused on cyber security as a top priority for many years. However, as they pursued an enterprise-wide Agile transformation, it became clear that security was not being addressed as early in the development process as it could be. In other words, the company’s development teams were working toward a DevOps structure, but they needed to establish a DevSecOps mindset instead.


  
Laying the foundation
The company’s adherence to leading industry security standards above and beyond local regulation is evidence of its focus on security. They have an international team of over 800 employees focused on constantly monitoring, protecting, and defending their systems and their customers’ data.

Once the company identified the need for DevSecOps, the Cyber Security team reached out to the coaches and consultants assisting with their ongoing Agile transformation to discuss how to best pursue DevSecOps. The Cyber team leads the organization’s detection, response, and recovery efforts. Thus, they provided an excellent environment for a pilot program that would work for scaling to other teams.

One executive sponsor from the company noted, “As we got further along in the Agile transformation, we noticed a lot of teams implementing DevOps in various ways and at different levels of maturity. What was consistent, though, was that they were only considering security at the very end of the process. So, a batch of code might have gone through the entire planning, development and deployment phases, but then it would need to go through the security team’s testing process. This tended to create bottlenecks and rework.”

Security is such an integral part of what the company does. But the fact that it was last in line just didn’t make sense. It became clear that the security element needed to move earlier in the workflow. Without this, the teams wouldn’t be able to enjoy the benefits that DevOps should have been providing for them.

The executive sponsor wanted to build on the foundation of practice that was already forming as the Agile transformation progressed. So she turned to Cprime Lean Agile Coach Farooq Mohammed to help establish a DevSecOps mindset in the Cyber teams.

Steps to success
“The first thing we needed,” the executive sponsor said, “was for each team to include at least one person who was knowledgeable about and dedicated to security. We called these individuals Security Champions, and we worked hard to recruit them throughout the Cyber teams.

The goal here was to ensure that they consider security concerns as early in the development process as possible. DevOps facilitates collaboration between development and operations disciplines to speed the development process and improve quality. Including cyber security considerations is a natural component to include. That way, they could identify and address security concerns earlier in the process.

Likewise, automation in the security testing and scanning process allows for robust security monitoring. And, it mitigates the bottlenecks created when waiting until a batch is ready for release to scan it for security issues.

These new Security Champions met together routinely to share ideas and identify best practices. They also worked diligently to get buy-in from their teams and stakeholders in leadership roles. This proved invaluable as the program scaled.

The executive sponsor recalled, “One of the tools we used was a monthly ‘Hack-a-thon’ where we encouraged participants to try to break our code and help us identify security vulnerabilities. Then, those who participated and showed a real passion for the work became our new Security Champions. This ensured security remained top-of-mind, and we knew we had the right people embedded in teams to support what we were trying to achieve with DevSecOps.”

A security-focused development culture
As the practice matured, the company created a knowledge repository for security-related information. They also included a means by which anyone could report potential issues.

Mohammed noted, “After a while, we began hearing from other departments about potential security issues they had identified. That’s when we knew we’d succeeded in creating a security-focused development culture.”

Outcomes
The automated tools collecting data for analysis are still relatively newly installed across the company’s Cyber team workflows. This means that concrete metrics are not yet available. However, anecdotal evidence already shows a clear positive impact of this move toward DevSecOps.

Knowledge sharing increased dramatically, and everyone was working together.

“We’ve established a more concrete learning path,” the executive sponsor said, “so members of the teams who are interested in upskilling and diving deeper into security have the tools and opportunities they need to do so.”

The executive sponsor also noted that embedding Security Champions within the teams significantly smoothed the deployment and release processes. As more automated security testing and monitoring are implemented in the coming months, the speed and efficiency of the development process will only improve.

If you would like similar results for your organization, reach out to a Cprime DevSecOps expert.









Case Study #28

Company Details
Industry: Automotive
Location: UK
Products: Automobiles
Cprime Services:
Agile Transformation
Agile Training and Coaching
Group Training
Executive Summary
This luxury automaker needed to achieve faster time to market, rapid value delivery, and increased innovation, with employees in the UK, Germany, and the US. With the help of Cprime's Agile experts, the company has enjoyed a significant boost in its ability to work effectively with distributed teams.


  
Overview
The company is a world leader in high-technology engines and renowned for high quality products and is one of the most prestigious and respected. Additionally, the market is intensely competitive and rapid innovation is essential.

The Challenge
The company was three years into a seven year global business transformation program to implement a Product Lifecycle Management approach using traditional management techniques. When they began their transformation, they were seeking to improve flexibility, capacity to deliver value, and ability to respond to market demands by introducing and optimizing a Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) approach to engine design, manufacture, and assembly.

Subsequently, after three years, the business had achieved an improvement of only 6% efficiency, which was insufficient to meet the company’s challenging market requirements. They also need the ability to compete in the market in very smart ways.

Making a Change Mid-Stream
Convinced that switching to an Agile approach would enable the PLM transformation, the company chose to partner with Cprime. Specifically, the mission was to achieve faster time to market, rapid value delivery, and increased innovation.

Additionally, the scope included all aspects of the program across all relevant business departments, including organization, process, technology, people, and cultural change.

The Solution
The Cprime team worked with the company’s team to catalyze their Agile transformation using a combination of coaching, consulting, practitioners, and training. The program involved more than 400 individuals in the UK, Germany, and the US.

The teams worked on:

Defining the Agile program approach of structure, organization and processes. In addition, this included distributed working and the use of communities of practice.
Coaching teams to use Agile effectively with the new PLM approach.
Training all relevant individuals in Agile approaches, totaling over 400 project managers, team members, and business stakeholders.
Consulting support for the senior program management and associated stakeholders.
 

“To start with I was skeptical. Agile has brought accelerated value delivery to our business. As a result, now I would fight ‘tooth and nail’ anything that threatened working this way. The Cprime team catalyzed our transformation to Agile, allowing us to see improvements straight away.” – Head of Product Lifecycle Management
 

The Results
The impact has been game changing. As a result of the transformation, the company has enjoyed a significant boost in its ability to work effectively with distributed teams. Additionally, they switched to a predictable release schedule and commitments, which are driven by business value. Their teams delivered 80% more changes than initially expected with a 90%+ acceptance rate for work managed through the new system.

Consequently, this pioneering Agile transformation, a first for this company, extended far beyond the IT team. Further, it was implemented in other business areas across multiple geographies and at scale. And even more stellar, key stakeholders repeatedly praised the wide-scale cultural mind-shift that came with this program, helping the organization to become more responsive.

The key results included:

Achieving effective distributed teams across multiple countries and functions.
Implementing block-point releases with:
A consistent and predictable calendar
Fixed time and cost
Variable scope
Transitioning to making commitments that benefit business outcomes, rather than hitting purely technical objectives.
And lastly, embedding ongoing business process improvement.









Case Study #29

Company Details
Industry: International Finance and Investment Banking
Company Size: Nearly 300,000 employees
Location: USA, with regional offices worldwide
Products: Asset management, banking, commodities, credit cards, equities trading, insurance, investment management, mortgage loans, mutual funds, private equity, risk management, wealth management
Cprime Services:
Agile Training and Coaching
Group Training
Technical Coaching
Executive Summary
This major international financial institution had a global challenge — getting their talented new hires up to speed quickly across six time zones.


  
Background
Few institutions in the financial sector offer greater depth and breadth of services than this Cprime customer. The bank serves the international banking and investment community on several levels. In addition to commercial and retail banking services globally, this industry leader is also a custodian bank for many of the financial industry’s largest hedge and investment funds.

The Challenge: Efficiently Onboarding Exceptional New Talent on a Global Scale
Software and IT infrastructure are the keys to creating the products and services required to maintain a competitive edge in the global finance industry. However, feeding that requirement demands a constant influx of new talent. “The bank has a high demand for software engineers. Each year the demand increases, and the firm struggles to meet this requirement,” says Stephanie Rowe, Cprime Account Director. So the bank’s challenge was twofold — finding and recruiting new talent and onboarding recruits efficiently to get them up to speed as productive employees.

To deal with the issue of onboarding, the bank’s human resources department created a program. The program takes newly graduated engineers straight out of university and establishes them on a two-year accelerated career path.

The objectives of the program were clear — to find and train exceptional new talent and foster innovative thinking to forward the institution’s business objectives using agile, collaborative methodologies. It focuses on innovation in all disciplines, from creating customer-facing digital and mobile applications to brainstorming and designing new ways to leverage big data or improve trading and payment systems. It promises recruits an opportunity to develop coding skills and work with leading-edge technologies like AI and ML. “Simply put, this program is central to the bank’s ability to grow,” adds Stephanie.

A Time for Change—Developing a Dynamic Curriculum with Cprime
While the goals of the program were well-established, the rapid annual growth of the program’s intakes and the increasing pace of technological change were proving problematic in terms of cost, logistics, and maintaining a dynamic curriculum. “The bank’s legacy training vendor, a management consulting firm that helmed the program for years, had become prohibitively expensive. The executive sponsors gave the impression they weren’t particularly pleased with recent outcomes,” says Stephanie.

Cprime, meanwhile, had established a strong relationship with the bank through previous successful engagements. “We built an important reputation with the client. The bank values our work, and we developed a high level of trust as their advisors in other areas involving curriculum development and creating bespoke training programs,” says Stephanie. “They believed that Cprime coaches were well-suited to the work, our pricing was competitive, and we offered high value. When we indicated we were interested in the project, the executive sponsors said yes.”

The Solution: Making it Happen—Practical Training with Real-World Applications
Cprime began the initiative in 2019. “In the first year, the program was limited to North America and EMEA with in-person training sessions in various cities. In the next year, 2020, the bank planned to extend the program to include locations in Asia. Then the pandemic struck,” says Stephanie. “As a result, we had to pivot. So we canceled face-to-face training, and our training and tech teams moved the program onto Zoom and Adobe Connect. Consequently, the sponsors were happy with the demo, and we rolled out the training remotely and on schedule.”

 

“Our partners at Cprime are instrumental to the renewed success of the program. They value our training as much as our internal team does, and we look forward to continuing with them face-to-face in 2022.” — Executive Sponsor
 

Expanding to meet organic growth
Initially, Cprime provided 50 associate agile and technical coaches to conduct the onboarding. Soon, that number climbed to over 70 as annual enrollment grew from 1,500 to 2,000 inductees across six time zones. “The training grows organically every year as demand increases around the business,” says Stephanie. “The program’s geographic scope expanded again in 2021 to include additional North and South American sessions. Plans for summer 2022 include resuming in-person training across the organization.”

Delivering practical rather than theoretical value
Stephanie Rowe and the Cprime team didn’t just pick up where the previous vendor left off. Instead, they re-invigorated the intake using internal agile practices to enhance the curriculum and teaching methods. “We are taking a hands-on, workshop-based approach,” she says, describing the new coursework focused on agile working methods and how they tie into the bank’s internal practices and systems. “It all works toward delivering practical rather than theoretical value.”

Streamlining delivery
The Cprime team also streamlined the course from 14 days down to 10. This further reduced the bank’s financial overheads and allowing greater coverage across the organization. “In some locations, we are delivering multiple inductions to keep up with the demand, and in 2022 we will train over 2,000 new employees between March and October,” says Stephanie. “We touch upon all the different aspects of the bank’s business. When they are done with the coursework, our training candidates are ready to move on to Operations, HR, Global Technology, Commercial Banking — anywhere the bank needs them.”

The Results: A Mutual Accomplishment
Three years into the engagement, with preparations for a fourth season underway, management at the bank quickly acknowledges that the program has exceeded expectations. “Our partners at Cprime are instrumental to the renewed success of this program. They value our training as much as our internal team does, and we look forward to continuing it face-to-face in 2022,” remarks one of the bank’s key project champions. Above all, the students agreed. They rated the experience as a 4+ out of 5 in a closing survey of the materials, coaches, relevance, and overall experience.

“Delivering the training was demanding but ultimately rewarding thanks to the agile attitude of the inductees and executive-level support we received,” says one Cprime associate. “It encouraged us to continue adapting and evolving the program in the training room and between deliveries.” The entire Cprime associate team mirrors the impression, giving their coaching experience a Net Promoter Score (NPS) of 84 on a scale of –100 to 100 — a metric NPS creators Bain and Company rate as “World Class.”








Case Study #30

Company Details
Industry: Insurance
Company Size: 30,000 full-time employees plus 13,500 independent brokers and agents
Location: New York, United States
Products: Personal and Commercial Casualty Insurance
Cprime Services:
MakeDev Program
Training/Coaching
Executive Summary
One of the biggest drivers of constant change is technology. As a result, there's always a need for more and different technologists. This global leader in casualty insurance was no exception when they put out an RFP looking for solutions. They were struggling to find enough developers while facing downsizing in other areas. The innovative solution proposed by Cprime won their attention and support.

Agile Class
  
Overview
The company is a leading underwriter of commercial property-casualty insurance in the US. It also operates a large national personal insurance business through independent agents across the US. A Fortune 100 organization, they have an extensive international portfolio as well.

Through its network of nearly 50,000 employees, the company has established a solid reputation in the industry. Making the best of available technologies is how they remain responsive to their clients’ needs.

An innovative solution for reskilling existing employees
The MakeDev Program is an offering wholly unique to Cprime and addresses the ongoing tech labor shortage. It allows companies to build new tech talent from their current valued, experienced workforce. These are positions that may otherwise be downsized or reallocated in the future. The same framework can also be applied to quickly upskilling new hires who have never worked in software development before.

Not a standard bootcamp training program
Cprime has long been a leader in the technical agile space. They have over thirty years of experience in training and professional development. Importantly, trainers and coaches are not just experienced teachers. They are practitioners who are in the trenches using the skills they’re passing on.

Ken Robinson, a Cprime technical agile coach who participated in the program, explains, “this is not a standard bootcamp. We’re not just dropping a bunch of knowledge on these students and sending them on their way. Rather, it’s a strategic combination of training, coaching, and real-world apprenticeship that leads to real, applicable skills.”

Nate Ashford, Cprime strategic technical coach, was the lead on this program. He added, “We employ a model that ensures that the short time we have is the most impactful. Rather than spending time on lectures and notetaking, students come into class with the curriculum already in their minds. They use in-class time to discuss, work out problems, and establish good habits. This helps them synthesize what they’re learning with what they’ve already learned.”

Bespoke instruction based on each student’s needs
The complete program spans six months. This is longer than most boot camp programs, but a fraction of the time spent obtaining a computer science degree. The first four months are dedicated to classroom instruction and coaching. Then, the last two months of the program, the students work as apprentice software developers. They receive coaching and mentoring support as they work on the team’s actual backlog tasks.

David Passarelli, who is a Cprime technical coach, partnered with Ken Robinson to implement the MakeDev program at this company. He noted, “I think one of the keys to the success of the MakeDev program is that Ken and I had the opportunity to get to know these students so well. We were encouraged to go beyond just being teachers and became mentors, confidants, even cheerleaders, as needed. We could truly tailor the instruction to each student’s unique needs, strengths, and learning styles.”

Addressing the company’s staffing issues
This unique reskilling program offers companies the opportunity to address more than one challenge at the same time:

The necessary reallocation of resources from non-tech roles to IT – as many functions become increasingly automated and software-centric, the need for people to fill these roles lessens as the need for software engineers to build the replacement systems rises.
The tech talent shortage – as already mentioned, there is an ever-growing demand for software engineers and developers that far outstrips the volume of skilled applicants coming out of universities and college programs.
The need for more diversity and inclusion in tech – at the same time, the overwhelming majority of software engineers coming through traditional programs are white males, leaving a considerable proportion of the company’s internal and external customers who are not represented within the development teams.
“In this case, I worked closely with the HR team at this company to address each of these challenges head-on,” says Ashford. “When we were looking into how to roll this out to the broader organization and choose participants, we developed our criteria with these issues in mind. Eventually, we settled on a simple essay contest to judge interest in participating and jumpstart the application process. The announcement went out to the entire organization, asking interested applicants to write a brief essay. We asked them to explain why they wanted to participate and what it would mean to their lives.”

They received over five hundred applications for the twenty available slots.

Participants were selected strategically for optimal impact
“We found that many who applied for the program fit closely with the established criteria,” Ashford recalls. “We weren’t looking as much at previous work experience or education, but rather at demonstrated skills such as logical reasoning, problem-solving ability, perseverance, and the grit required to take on a rigorous learning challenge.”

Robinson explains, “We knew the curriculum and our coaching ability were sufficient to provide the basic skills these folks needed to succeed in this program. But, if they didn’t really want it — if this wasn’t something they were willing to commit to for reasons beyond curiosity or just a paycheck — we knew it wouldn’t be enough.”

They were also excited to find it was a highly diverse group of applicants. “Eighteen of the final class of twenty students did not fit the standard profile for software engineers across industries. It was so exciting to see,” Passarelli shares.

Most of those selected to participate came from the claims processing and customer service departments — areas of the business facing potential downsizing for the reasons cited above. “Now,” Ashford states, “these experienced claims processors and CSRs are working on the building and enhancing of the very internal systems they previously used to serve customers. Traditional recruiting methods could have never found that kind of in-depth domain knowledge and experience.”

A student-centric approach based on empathy
“What I love most about the MakeDev model,” Pascarelli notes, “is the personalized attention and guidance we, as instructors, can provide.”

Both Ken and David hail from long careers working on development teams in a corporate setting, much like the students they now train. This provides a level of empathy and practical experience that far exceeds what a purely academic teaching model would offer.

Robinson concurs, “As the students progressed through each unit, they inevitably ran into more challenging areas that required a little more support or explanation. The program makes that easy by design. David and I didn’t have to slow the entire group to help one person or force anyone to keep up when they couldn’t do so. And, our experience working in corporate IT teams made it easy for us to relate our coaching to the kind of problem-solving situations they would need to face in the future.”

Amazing results
All twenty of the pilot program’s participants graduated from the MakeDev program and began working as entry-level software engineers immediately after. Two years later, nineteen are still working in the company’s IT department, most as level two or three engineers at this point.

Leaders within the organization have noted that having these graduates on their teams has had a positive impact in several ways:

The organization was undergoing an Agile transformation at the time, so injecting team members into the teams who knew no other way to work served as a forcing function to help push these teams to function with more agility overall.
The experience they bring from their previous roles — nearly all of which were more customer-facing than the rest of the IT team members — has proven invaluable as they work to improve the functionality of internal claims processing systems.
The excitement the program generated across the organization was palpable and continues to be a subject of conversation.
Many departments and leaders, including the CEO himself, joined in to support and encourage the students as they progressed. Robinson recalls, “When the students finished the classroom portion of the program after four months, we held a graduation ceremony. The number of people from around the organization who wanted to attend and join in the celebration was surprising.”

Ashford adds, “I even overheard the CEO say this was the easiest funding approval he’d ever signed. He said the value to the organization was just undeniable.”

Plans to repeat the process
The company is now planning to repeat the process, perhaps on an ongoing basis.

“That makes sense,” Passarelli concludes. “The drivers that make the MakeDev program such a powerful solution aren’t going away anytime soon. As this company learned, the pace of change and ongoing need for software engineers makes it an unbeatable value proposition in today’s market.”












Case Study #31

Company Details
Industry: International Banking and Finance
Company Size: 220,000 Employees
Location: Asia Pacific
Products: Commercial and Retail Banking Services
Cprime Services:
Agile Transformation
Agile Team Training
Executive Summary
With regional marketing teams spanning the globe, the bank wanted to improve communications and increase productivity by adopting Agile for its marketing teams. With the help of Cprime Agile experts, they adopted tools and a mindset that promotes cross-functional collaboration over silos and hierarchies.


  
Overview: A Global Presence
Headquartered in the UK, this Cprime client is a worldwide market leader and its workforce reflects that diversity. With 220,000 employees and operations in over 60 countries, the bank holds over 2.7 trillion USD in assets.

With roots that reach back to 1865, this top-five international financial institution has major operations based in Hong Kong, Shanghai, Taiwan, the Philippines, Japan, Singapore, Vietnam, and Thailand in addition to Canadian, Mexican, and several South American and European subsidiaries. In 2021, the bank recorded revenues of 18.9 billion USD, up from 8.8 billion in 2020.

The Challenge: Bridging Cultural Differences and Tackling Misconceptions
Driven by an executive sponsor, the bank sought to alleviate pressure and increase efficiency within its international B2B, business, and traditional marketing teams. They also needed a way to focus the teams on providing significant, incremental customer value. And, finally, they needed to focus on driving business outcomes rather than on perfecting individual deliverables within a static plan.

“The teams were overwhelmed and working late to meet goals without making tangible progress,” explains Cprime Agile Coach, David Marsh. “They were locked into a mindset where they were dedicating the first three to four weeks of a three-month project to planning and writing the brief rather than delivering and getting feedback. Even with intuitive and “fun” Agile tools in place, they were still using paper notebooks to track tasks.”

Changing perceptions
PuzzleTo accomplish its goals, the bank first needed to shift the marketing teams’ perception that Agile was just for developers. “Early on we found that if we talked about Scrum or anything they felt was software related, they immediately turned off,” says Marsh. “They only wanted to know how organizations around the world use Agile to deliver successful marketing campaigns.”

 

Cultural considerations
The organization’s multicultural workforce presented the final hurdle. “It is difficult enough creating change in an organization,” says Marsh. “But, in this case, we were dealing with regional Asian cultural differences and formalized hierarchies. The team leaders felt that, especially in Zoom meetings, key stakeholders were often spectators.”

To establish collaboration, the bank needed to open communication within teams as well as between them. Looking for a solution, the bank contacted Cprime.

The Solution: Partnering with Cprime to Ensure Success
Cprime first adopted a proactive approach to defining the bank’s requirements. “We focused on discovery, meeting up with all the APAC heads of marketing to identify their needs and understand their pain points and the challenges they were having,” says Marsh.

An agile foot in the door
One key Cprime takeaway after discovery was the role that software tooling played in the marketing teams’ uptake of Agile ways of working. Where a previous vendor’s efforts fell short in their attempt to get the marketing teams to adopt Jira, Cprime identified that the teams had independently gravitated to Monday.com, Agile team management software that is adaptable to ways of working that include Scrum and Kanban.

“Monday helped mitigate the team’s aversion to what they considered Agile software development tools,” says Marsh. “It is an intuitive, easy to use, and visually engaging tool. It was also a foot in the door to promote Agile concepts and help the marketing teams understand their capacity by breaking their work down, prioritizing, and achieving a more sustainable pace.”

Bespoke training for specific needs
Armed with this understanding, the Cprime trainers went back to basics, creating a bespoke program to make Agile concepts relatable to their marketing audience and provide them with a framework they could use alongside the tool to streamline marketing processes. “Everything was customized because it needed to be. We created introductory workshops, drawing on the Agile Marketing Manifesto and Alistair Cockburn’s Heart of Agile with its Collaborate, Deliver, Reflect, and Improve cycle,” says Marsh. “Cprime delivered, and that resonated with the teams and helped change their approach.”

 

“Over the course of the training sessions, we saw behavioral changes in the bank’s marketing team leaders. Those positive adjustments empowered their team members to speak up and actively participate.”
 

EmPOWERing communication
To improve communication during meetings over Zoom, Marsh and the Cprime coaches again applied proven Agile concepts to fit both the marketing organization’s goals and the teams’ cultural context. The team adapted the Agile Coaching Institute’s POWER Start to establish the purpose and desired outcome of each call, and improved engagement by clearly defining each participant’s role during the workshop or meeting.

Over the course of the engagement, Cprime also developed the Agile Catalyst Network, a series of discussions and workshops that covered multiple topics including team formation and dynamics, backlog estimation, and agile story point estimation techniques. This program doubled in size within a few months and led to several excellent coaching opportunities in various teams. Those opportunities even included the regional B2B marketing strategy and programs team.

Results: Watching Foundations Take Shape
“There were several teams of around ten people each, and we eventually trained over one-third of the client’s 300-person strong Asian marketing force,” says Marsh. “We easily covered a dozen different subjects, many of them at the team’s request. The customized training approach worked,” says Marsh. “Our corporate sponsors reported that many of those catalyst session participants went back to their own leadership to say ‘Hey, we explored this, I think we should roll it out to the team.’”

Improving the workplace
Encouraging the use of Zoom annotations and the POWER Start to define roles and promote objectives during meetings also bore fruit. “The biggest thing that we saw was an improvement in engagement and collaboration during the meetings. All of the teams showed growth, but one team from Vietnam really started opening up,” says Marsh. “They learned they had a voice and they could contribute.”

In addition to empowering the team members, Cprime worked with the marketing team leaders to assist them with Agile leadership and address the issue of staff retention in light of the Great Attrition. “We did a lot of role-playing and explored common management scenarios,” says Marsh. “And the leaders began to realize that a lot of their learned behavior was inhibiting agility.

A basis for change
“We laid a strong foundation. They now understand that to continue moving forward, they need to adopt tools and a mindset that promotes cross-functional collaboration over silos and hierarchies.”

“We are clearly adding value,” concludes Marsh. “The teams started hesitantly with single sessions and now they keep calling us back for more. Our calendars are full despite their heavy workloads and other changes within the organization.”











Case Study #32

Company Details
Industry: Insurance (Commercial Property & Casualty)
Company Size: 5,800 Employees
Location: USA
Products: Customized Business Insurance, Business and Professional Services, Risk Control
Cprime Services:
Agile Team Training
Agile Transformation
SAFe Transformation
Executive Summary
The commercial casualty and property insurance sector is highly dynamic. Influenced by external factors, including strict domestic and international regulation, changing market requirements, and long- and short-term business cycles, this global commercial insurance provider turned to Cprime to transform processes and improve its competitive edge.


  
Overview
A mainstay in the commercial insurance industry, this company’s early accomplishments heralded a long-standing reputation for innovation.

They continue to break new ground by exploring new customer segments in the commercial realm and expanding their global digital presence. The U.S.-based commercial insurer also provides services for businesses and professionals in Canada, Europe, and Asia.

Aligning Business Goals with Technical Investment
No industry exists in a vacuum, but the commercial casualty and property insurance sector is particularly dynamic. Influenced by myriad external factors, including strict domestic and international regulation, changing market requirements, and long- and short-term business cycles, the company wanted to increase its competitive edge. “Management was seeing the inconsistent delivery of technology to support its platforms and products,” explains Cprime Principal Consultant Daniel Gilio, who was the Delivery Manager for this engagement. “They wanted to maximize their spending and better understand the effect of changes on overall value and technical quality.”

Under the waterfall
In particular, the company was looking to move away from a traditional waterfall way of working toward a more product-oriented and, eventually, a portfolio-level approach. Despite their commitment to advancement, “They recognized their project-oriented way of working was holding their technology platforms back—everything worked, but the company wanted them to be state-of-the-art,” says Gilio. “They needed visibility into the work to ensure that once something hit production, it met expectations and tied business objectives to technical investment.”

Turning on a dime
Finally, the company sought more flexibility in approaching their product and technical development. Longer fixed development schedules affected the insurer’s ability to rapidly introduce or adapt its products. “Management needed the ability to quickly pivot, repurpose, and rescope to address changing business conditions,” Gilio says.

The Solution: Covering all the Bases with Cprime
The insurer approached Cprime for several reasons. First, “the Cprime flywheel approach—the way we holistically implement mutually reinforcing strategies to effect progressive change—was attractive to the company,” says Gilio. “Next came our experience in not only scaled agile but in agile tooling and product agility.”

Finally, the company was aware of Cprime’s reputation for success with enterprise clients in the global commercial P&C space. “They knew we could leverage best practices and had customizable assets built up out of prior engagements to help them more easily achieve their transformation goals,” says Gilio. “We had a robust starting point to sit down with our executive sponsors and design training relevant to their business.”

Working toward goals—rapidly adapting to requirements
Although the Cprime brief ultimately focused on migrating the company toward SAFe processes, the team broke the initial transformation efforts into more digestible, non-disruptive segments. “The company knew moving straight to SAFe was too big of a lift, so we began training in agile and scrum to get some smaller successes under their belt—to get them comfortable with the mechanics of working with SAFe at the portfolio level,” explains Gilio.

Moving incrementally toward transformation, Cprime established an agile center of excellence comprised of a dozen company leaders. From there, the two-person team trained product owners and product managers, helping the insurer create high-level, in-house scrum masters. As the group grew to five, “Cprime provided training and workshops to over 400 people within the organization,” says Gilio. “We designed just-in-time training and workshops that ranged from SAFe-team sessions of around 30 people to product-owner workshops with as few as 5 or 6 attendees.”

 

“We don’t train for the sake of training—with Cprime, there is always a practical takeaway rather than just a certification that gets the client no closer to its goal.”
—Daniel Gilio, Cprime Delivery Manager
 

Providing skills, not badges
Cprime focused on on-the-ground, functional coaching to get the insurer’s teams ready for successful transformation. “We don’t train for the sake of training—we do workshops with live assets,” Gilio says. “By the time we finish mentoring a two-hour session, they have something useful like user stories that are part of their backlog or are sized for scrum planning poker. There is always a practical takeaway, not just a hollow certification that gets the client no closer to the goal of launching an agile release train.”

The advantages of a well-rounded partner
During this timeframe, the company was transitioning from Version One to Jira to manage Scrum assets. “The company didn’t explicitly engage us to support their Jira migration,” says Gilio, “but, because of our deep knowledge of agile, Atlassian, and the mechanics of implementing Jira, our coaches were on hand to help. The wide scope of Cprime’s experience ended up providing unexpected benefits.”

The company utilized Cprime’s expertise in aligning the practical Coaching with the alignment of Jira as the mechanism to manage Scrum team-level ceremonies. Cprime provided targeted training for ScumMasters, Product Owners, and Teams aligned with the implemented Agile best practices.

In addition to training, Cprime provided additional expertise as needed.

The Results: Transforming Scope, Schedule, and Budget
Cprime began training the insurer’s teams in 2019. “Our initial outcomes were the change to scrum and moving the company away from a traditional PMO (project management office) perspective,” says Gilio. “The company was thrilled to be operating within the iron triangle of scope, schedule, and budget, but it is just getting started.”

The insurer went from waterfall to scrum and then took those scrum learnings to SAFe. “The company successfully moved their digital transformation forward by staying within the agile guardrails,” says Gilio. “Now they have five agile release trains and are about to launch their sixth. They can quickly alter the scope or reprioritize when they need to.” The changes have had a significant impact on planning and seeing quality results.

Clear priorities
“With SAFe in place, management can now ask and answer questions like ‘Does this initiative help with risk reduction or opportunity enablement, how long will it take, how much will it cost, and how will it affect the business?’” says Gilio. “As a result, they can recognize and prioritize smaller but more strategic and higher ROI jobs over projects that might take an additional sixteen months to generate the same amount of revenue.”

A quick pivot
In one instance, this newfound agility allowed the insurer to pivot to make rapid adjustments to specific products and tech platforms in the face of COVID 19 rather than removing them from the marketplace or compromising on their quality. “They used SAFe principles to define and prioritize that work using empirical data and lean budget principles,” states Gilio.

Future Stops for the Agile Release Train
Despite the scope of the changes, the transformation is far from complete. “With the foundation in place, the company is scaling up and launching more release trains,” says Gilio. “Our sponsors are moving to adopt more SAFe-based techniques at the portfolio level and have renewed with Cprime to achieve that going forward.”





Case Study #33

Company Details
Industry: Pharmaceutical
Company Size: 90,000 Employees
Location: UK
Products: Pharmaceutical and Consumer Health Products
Cprime Services:
Agile Team Training
Agile Transformation
SAFe Solutions
Executive Summary
In a highly controlled industry with glacial development cycles, the company sought to align its process and make incremental improvements across R&D Tech. The goal was to implement agile methods into highly regulated ways of working. With the help of Cprime Agile and SAFe experts, over 1500 team members were trained in the midst of a significant Agile transformation, resulting in improved productivity and alignment.


  
Overview
This Cprime client is among the top ten providers in the pharmaceutical industry. With hundreds of familiar brands under its umbrella, it is as active in the consumer healthcare sector as in pharmaceutical manufacturing and development.

The company has research and development facilities on every continent and reported a 2020 annual revenue of $43.7 billion. With 16,000 employees engaged in pharmaceutical, vaccine, and consumer healthcare research and development, it serves 96 international markets. It employs nearly 100,000 people worldwide with UK headquarters that host a staff of over 10,000.

The Problem: Reducing Development Cycles and Improving Visibility
Pharmaceuticals are big business; that much is obvious. Less apparent, however, is the complexity of the pharmaceutical sector and the number of processes, departments, and people involved. Even more significant are the time frames. “Things take forever in the pharma industry, whether it’s getting new medications or vaccines out, going through trials, or getting the right data,” explains Brian Segel, Cprime Delivery Director. “The fact is, things can take upwards of a decade to go from idea to market. Then there are all the regulatory and compliance considerations.”

Going agile in the face of heavy regulation
In a highly controlled industry with glacial cycle times, the company sought to align its process and make incremental improvements across critical departments. The goal was to implement agile processes into highly regulated ways of working. “No process here is external from regulation. Everything is GxP—over 90% of the work involves FDA and EMA oversight,” says Adam Mitchell, Principal Consultant, Cprime.

Segel adds, “While working within those restrictions, they wanted to know how to shorten the time between discovering something and getting it to the public—how to improve their development value streams to reduce waste in their operational value streams.”

A quest for effective oversight
The pharmaceutical manufacturer’s executives had additional goals. “The company lacked a framework to ensure effective oversight,” says Mitchell. “It wanted to give its stakeholders better control of their portfolios. It wanted empirical data, metrics it could use to create effective roadmaps while decentralizing decision making and applying systems thinking.”

The Solution: Cprime, a SAFe Decision
The company approached Cprime on the strength of a prior external engagement with an executive sponsor who recently joined R&D Tech. “Going in, they knew the quality we delivered and the value that we provided from our coaching,” says Segel. “But what stood apart was our experience and profound understanding of the SAFe framework.”

Modest beginnings
At the outset, it was a loose engagement with modest expectations. “We had to come in fresh and start from the bottom up,” says Segel. “Initially, one of our corporate sponsors wanted to bring a coach and some scrum masters into a single area and see if agile helped address the slow movement of processes across pharma.”

Given the organization’s size, the Cprime team determined that incremental improvements were the way forward. “There wasn’t a structured scope of work. We worked for transformation, identifying new areas where we could provide coaching and help them be more effective with their programs and running agile,” says Segel.

The scope grows
The team worked with the company to shape its roadmap and coach its teams and programs for nine months. “Word started to spread; people heard good things about what we were doing, and that led to another program,” says Segel. “From there, it snowballed. We continued identifying new areas where we could add value, and that led to another four coaches over the next two years.”

“Now we have a mixture of agile coaches, product coaches, scrum masters, and portfolio coaches on site—the best trainers Cprime has,” adds Scott Seivwright, Cprime Agile Coach.

An agile buffet
Continually adapting, Cprime facilitated multiple transformations as the company’s needs evolved. “We didn’t just offer scrum master courses. We got into DevOps, Agile Program Management (APM), and Lean Portfolio Management—difficult, top-shelf SAFe classes where we took deep dives into specific real-world problems,” says Mitchell. “With the backing of our executive sponsors, we were clear when the course ended on Friday that on Monday we expected attendees back in their programs with a list of improvements. The SVP, who attended the training, really helped us connect the dots.”

Maintaining a solid footing in a complex ecosystem
This project brought a unique set of challenges for the Cprime team due to the pharmaceutical manufacturer’s low ratio of core tech employees to contracted suppliers.

 

“The company outsources 95% of its tech, so we were strategic partners with two industry leaders in the technology and operations strategy as well as the IT consultancy spaces. Our teams focused on the difficult, unstructured areas. We built in structure and agility, passed it on to our strategic partners, and moved on to the next hard problem. When we were done, everyone could see we provided tangible value. It built our reputation, and we used that social capital to drive our programs.”
— Adam Mitchell, Cprime Principal Consultant
 

Results: Incremental Improvements with Broad Implications
While a single change is a drop in the ocean, the advantages of incremental improvement are massive at scale. “It’s a daisy chain—thirty or fifty or more portfolios and projects end-to-end,” explains Mitchell. “We applied systems thinking to shrink down the cycles. Everyone shortened their little bit. Within the purview of an R&D tech division with 2,500 staff and a $200 million budget, any improvement saves the company a lot of money, even if it’s a small percentage. There are many broad implications to the work we have done, from how teams deal with regulations to how they approach user acceptance testing.”

Equipped for performance
The Cprime team’s consistent, highly focused training efforts helped put the company on a new course. “We’ve given them tools like agile release trains or portfolio support and supplied them with the skills to tackle issues with value streams,” says Seivwright. “We involved everyone from the director down. That includes their horizontal as well as vertical delivery teams. R&D Tech has about 2,500 core company employees, and we trained 60% of them. We issued around 300 certificates. More importantly, they all use the same framework, whether at the product, portfolio, or team level. It’s all been about speeding things up. The departments are much more customer-focused, understand the ideas behind product in an agile sense, and they keep moving forward.”

Fostering collective accountability
In addition to the structural and process changes, communication has improved within the organization. Implementing Communities of Practice, Cprime fostered more rapid problem-solving, improved quality and cooperation across domains, and incubated a sense of shared responsibility. “Within these communities, all the suppliers, strategic partners, and company employees could finally have difficult conversations safely,” Seivwright explains. The changes made the organization’s complex supplier/employee topography easier for everyone to navigate, resulting in further efficiency.

Bringing the bottom line into focus
Finally, the executive-level sponsors are on a quarterly cadence toward greater transparency and predictability in operations. “With the Release Time Engineering framework, management has real-time data of how complete their projects are, down to half a percent,” says Mitchell. “From there, they can extrapolate when they’re likely to finish.”

A Partnership Based in Trust
Handshake Icon“We didn’t approach this in isolation. Working with the company and our executive sponsors was easy, but we also needed our strategic partners, and we stayed aware that we weren’t the first consultants there and we wouldn’t be the last,” says Mitchell. “That made it important to differentiate ourselves. Sometimes that meant asking hard questions, but our executive sponsors wanted the answers, and that open relationship established trust.”

As for the future, “The company has seen the holistic solution and understands the connectivity its agile teams need to work with. The next step is to help them align and collaborate across different areas and with different metrics and tooling to get that transparency going forward,” concludes Segel.











Case Study #34

Company Details
Industry: Marketing Automation Software
Company Size: 900 Employees
Location: Atlanta, GA
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Cloud Migration

  
About Acoustic
Acoustic is an independent marketing cloud and analytics provider. Acoustic supports more than 3,500 brands, including Fortune 500 companies, providing digital marketing, marketing analytics, content management, personalization, mobile marketing, and marketing automation solutions.

The Challenge
Due to significant growth in Atlassian usage, Acoustic has experienced frequent space and storage issues as their self-managed instance reached its limits. Acoustic wished to reduce the overall level of effort for maintenance and administrative support.

The Solution
Acoustic migrated to the Atlassian Cloud and now can scale as needed at an overall lower administrative and infrastructure costs.

The Benefits
Availability & Scalability
Running on Atlassian Cloud allowed Acoustic to scale their applications to adjust for the rapid growth without
lifting a finger.

Administrative Support
Reducing the need for administrative support allowed Acoustic’s application admins to focus their time on more
high-value activities.

TCO
The total cost of ownership for the Atlassian tools was reduced by over 50%, when taking into an account the original infrastructure cost, infrastructure support costs, and maintenance downtime maintenance downtime.









Case Study #35

Company Details
Industry: Performance Marketing, Online Media
Company Size: 600 employees
Location: Foster City, CA
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Cloud Migration

  
About QuinStreet
QuinStreet is an online performance marketing company providing technologies for businesses to identify their targeted audiences. This organization helps businesses target their would-be customer audiences by using its proprietary technologies and media reach to generate sales leads. As a sign of confidence in its quality, QuinStreet has adopted a pay-for-performance model of pricing. Founded in 1999, QuinStreet is headquartered in Foster City, California, with satellite offices worldwide and 500 employees.

The Challenge
In recent months, QuinStreet has experienced several long planned and unplanned outages due to security vulnerability patching and upgrades. These outages, combined with the rising costs of running Atlassian applications in their own data center while maintaining environments secured and up to date, have prompted QuinStreet to seek a migration to Atlassian Cloud.

The Solution
Consolidating multiple instances into one and migrating Atlassian applications to the cloud allowed QuinStreet to decommission several on-prem server and environments and reduce overall costs. Going to the SaaS solution also aligned with executive goals of moving enterprise applications to the cloud.

The Benefits
TCO
Consolidating multiple instances into one introduced significant savings in licensing costs. Additional cost savings were introduced due to decommission of the on-prem environments.

Administrative Overhead
After moving to Cloud, admins are focused on enabling users and ensuring the smooth operations of applications,
without having to constantly worry about downtime or the maintenance of on-prem infrastructure.

Security Concerns
Security concerns have been alleviated, there’s no longer any outages to patch operating system and remediate CVE
vulnerabilities. The team can now focus on high-value activities.









Case Study #36

Company Details
Industry: Insurance (Medical, and Property & Casualty)
Company Size: 400 employees
Location: USA
Products: Medical Claims Management Software
Cprime Services:
Jira
Jira Service Management
Executive Summary
This medical claims management software developer wanted to increase organizational and DevOps efficiency around planning, quantifying, and tracking work at the task, project, and portfolio levels. With help from Cprime's Atlassian tooling experts, they have everything they need to embrace an agile mindset and achieve an agile delivery method.


  
Overview
This Cprime client offers a comprehensive suite of technical software solutions for medical and insurance claims management. They help their partners maximize efficiency, improve decision making, and reduce ROI while enhancing claims outcomes in the Medical and Property and Casualty (P&C) markets.

Their proprietary, HIPAA-compliant management platform is derived from 35 years of industry experience. It streamlines the medical claims process by facilitating services that range from peer reviews and independent medical examinations to medical record reviews and field case management. The company’s solutions serve major regional and international insurance providers in the Northeast US.

Seeking Improved Reporting, Planning, and Accountability
The company provides software-as-a-service in the competitive, highly regulated, and ever-evolving insurance claim management sector. They wanted to increase organizational and DevOps efficiency around planning, quantifying, and tracking work at the task, project, and portfolio levels.

“Their developers are responsible for both support and development,” explains Drew Garvey, Cprime Delivery Manager. “And they had a lot of fly-by requests, emails, phone calls, and Teams messages they struggled to track. The existing infrastructure was hindering their development work.”

To address this, the claims management provider had two primary goals. “First, they wanted a framework to better organize their work-in-flight, project work, and support-related jobs,” says Garvey.

Second, the company needed a platform that provided real-time reporting, increased the accuracy of timelines and estimates, and improved transparency on work assignments and progress. “They wanted to scale their development and planning infrastructure for larger projects,” Garvey summarizes.

Choosing the Right Partner
A Project Management Organization (PMO) had been established to oversee processes and internally promote agile methodologies, and they turned to Cprime to update their development infrastructure. “The company came to us based on a prior collaboration,” says Garvey. “We had worked with them several years ago to move their SharePoint and Excel-based manual systems into a Jira Cloud environment.”

Cprime began with a site assessment. “We set up several interviews and worked with our executive sponsor from the PMO and the stakeholder teams in discovery workshops to determine their current tools and processes and identify gaps,” says Garvey. “From there, Cprime developed a backlog within their Jira platform and built out the implementation plan for a framework that would promote alignment while they scaled.”

Tooling up with Structure for Jira Cloud, Advanced Roadmaps, and Jira Service Management
strategic consultingCprime began by implementing Jira Service Management across the organization to reduce interdepartmental silos, foster streamlined collaboration, centralize task tracking, and allow them to respond more proactively to service requests.

 

“The company now has the information it needs to more effectively estimate and complete work based on their current teams’ available capacity. More importantly, they can determine if they need to augment staff to achieve future strategic goals.”
— Drew Garvey, Cprime Delivery Manager
 

At the portfolio and project levels, the Cprime team expanded the company’s limited Jira Cloud implementation with Structure for Jira Cloud and Advanced Roadmaps (Jira Premium). This provided the PMO and executive teams with enhanced planning capabilities, allowed them to scale and track plans and dependencies across multiple teams and provided a single source of truth for reporting progress.

A Wealth of Information
“Ultimately, Cprime created an intake form using Jira Service Management for support and for feature requests,” says Garvey. “That implementation affects all areas of the company, especially the development teams, integration teams, and DBAs who each have their own little slice of Jira to manage work assignments.”

With the new metrics, the PMO has greater visibility and more control over the development process. “They’re better able to quantify the time spent on higher priority, tier-one break-fix support and on development,” says Garvey.

The Strategic Advantages
As a result of the new infrastructure, the PMO team gained a top-down view of the project and portfolio levels. “They can immediately see the progress of a particular project at any given time,” says Garvey. “It is easier than ever to identify statuses, blockers and dependencies, pending items, and who’s working on what.”

“The teams now have the information they need to estimate and complete work based on their current teams’ available capacity,” says Garvey. “This also helps them determine if they need to augment staff to achieve strategic goals. Leveraging the enhanced functionality of Advanced Roadmaps and Structure, the PMO is now setting more accurate timelines and providing their executive sponsors with more meaningful information.”

Ready for the Future
“Overall, it was a highly collaborative process,” says Garvey. “We worked closely with the head of the PMO and the company’s executive stakeholders to realize their vision and assist them with their tooling decisions and design.”

Even with the new infrastructure in place, it is just the beginning for this medical claims provider. “They have everything they need to embrace an agile mindset and achieve an agile delivery method,” says Garvey. “Our executive sponsors extended the engagement several times and, as they move forward, Cprime is prepared to help the company complete their transformation.”











Case Study #37

Company Details
Industry: Insurance
Company Size: 20,000+ employees
Location: UK, and Newark, New Jersey, USA, and 40+ international offices
Products: Life Insurance, Investment Management, Consumer Finance
Cprime Services:
Agile Transformation
Training
Atlassian Licensing
Executive Summary
As part of its ongoing efforts to gain a greater portion of the rapidly expanding online B2C insurance market, the insurance company acquired a disruptive, direct-to-consumer sales platform. Its goal was to transform the insurance buying experience for individuals seeking personalized health and financial wellness solutions. With the help of Cprime Agile experts, they underwent an extensive Agile transformation that smoothed the transition.


  
Headquartered in London and Newark, NJ, with subsidiaries and offices in over 40 countries in the Americas, Asia, Africa, and Europe, the client, a top international insurance provider, has offered consumer and commercial insurance products in the UK for over 170 years. The company has operated in the US since 1875.

With an estimated customer base of over 29 million people, the insurance provider reported an annual revenue of nearly $60 billion in 2020.

Recognizing the Need for Full-Scale Organizational Change
As part of its ongoing efforts to gain a greater portion of the rapidly expanding online B2C insurance market, the insurance company acquired a disruptive, direct-to-consumer sales platform. Its goal was to transform the insurance buying experience for individuals seeking personalized health and financial wellness solutions.

“After the acquisition, the insurer’s whole business model had to change. Everything had to go—the way they worked, the way they planned for work, their workflows, and the way they organized their workflows into teams,” explains Eyal Abukasis, Cprime Sales Director for the Central Region. “They were essentially a new organization and they needed somebody to help them establish a new way of working.”

Given the scope of changes to come and impact on the organization as a whole, the insurer engaged a top global management consulting firm—trusted, high-level advisors and counselors to many of the world’s most influential businesses and institutions—to complete an assessment and guide its transformation.

“They needed to port an understanding of agile practices and how everything works together from the senior leaders down. Recognizing Cprime’s expertise across the enterprise, they asked to partner with us to support the overall transformation with program and team level coaching.”
— Brian Segel, Cprime Managing Director
From the Top Down—Putting Agile Theory into Practice
The management consultants performed extensive agile health checks and assessed the insurer’s strategic goals and business processes. Ultimately, they recommended implementing their in-house agile processes and New Way of Working (NWoW) to improve efficiency. The consultants submitted a proposal to provide the insurer with high-level management and strategic support for its agile adoption which relied upon working with Cprime as their trusted partner on the ground to make it happen.

Cprime’s long-established relationship with the insurer played a key factor in its selection for the partnership. “We have been working with the company since 2015,” says Abukasis. “Our knowledge and experience of the insurer’s culture and previous successes with its teams in addition to our deep understanding of the management consultancy’s goals and processes helped us hit the ground running.”

With the consulting firm working with the insurance company’s senior leadership to foster a top-down understanding of agile practices, Cprime was the implementation arm to forward its strategy. “Our expertise across the enterprise supported the overall agile transformation with program level and team level coaching,” says Brian Segel, Managing Director at Cprime.

Staying flexible and adapting to evolving needs
For the Cprime team, adaptability was critical to ensuring the success of the insurance provider’s agile adoption. “The initial agreement was to support the team transformations with learning and development,” says Chris Thiele, Cprime Delivery Manager and the insurer’s primary contact responsible for executing the implementation. “Our partners planned the transformation based upon the demand they saw, but, after getting in there, we both agreed we needed to adjust our strategy to meet real conditions.”

Those conditions involved organizational changes and shifts of focus—including a change in leadership at the agile transformation office itself and a significant restructuring of the insurer’s workforce. “We initially anticipated working predominantly in the CORE space, but the Chief Data Office (CDO) ended up being our actual focus. We adapted based upon the organization’s evolving needs,” Thiele says.

Shifting teams to meet real demand
Throughout the project, the Cprime team fluctuated in size to support the consultancy’s agile initiatives and meet the insurance provider’s needs. “Initially, we had two coaches in the academy, the main pillar of the agile transformation office. Those coaches developed the agile materials and training sessions for the roles, teams and coaches coming on board throughout the organization,” explains Thiele. “As the adoption gained momentum, we added a team of six coaches to work with the 34 teams the CDO needed to transition.”

Following Through to Ensure Success
Once the high-level strategic work was done, Cprime stayed with the insurance company to supplement and up-level their training materials and classes and sustain the agile adoption and training.

With the role of the consultants at an end, “We began working even more closely with the insurance provider’s teams to identify and fill in gaps and add additional value to their processes,” says Thiele. “To further support the transformation, Cprime also managed Atlassian licensing for 7,000 people within the organization,” adds Abukasis.

Despite the sweeping changes within the insurance organization, on the ground the transformation proceeded smoothly. “Ultimately we were hired to get the teams through the agile adoption, and we achieved that,” says Thiele.

“They were very eager to onboard the agile framework—our whole engagement has been overwhelmingly positive. Now we’re moving past the adoption into agile maturity. That’s the outcome that we’re driving going forward,” Thiele concludes.











Case Study #39

Company Details
Industry: Consumer Goods (Food and Beverage)
Company Size: Over 22,500 (parent company)
Location: Canada
Products: World-famous packaged food and beverage brands
Cprime Services:
Adopting and Adapting Agility Workshop
Scrum Master Workshop
Product Discovery Workshop
Executive Summary
Few industries can match the competitive nature of nondurable consumer goods. Even long-time international leaders must continually innovate and streamline to maintain and grow market share. The Canadian division of a large food and beverage producer recognized this and tapped Cprime experts to help boost agility and speed to market for new and updated consumer goods.


  
Competitive pressure
Despite such a strong and storied position as a consumer goods leader, this organization is not immune to the strong competitive pressure that pervades the global industry. While they are currently the largest food and beverage company in Canada, there are over a dozen larger international players that are always striving to make inroads into North America. Likewise, hundreds of smaller companies and startups are constantly disrupting the status quo.

As a result, and backed by a strong corporate culture, this organization recognized the need to continually improve. They place a high value on innovation and quality but also determine the need to speed up their time to market for new and updated products and brands.

They reached out to Cprime and started down that path.

The need for agility
Enterprise agility—the sum product of Cprime’s wide array of consulting, coaching, and support services—fills the need for speed and agility in any large organization. Of course, Agile methodologies have traditionally been applied to software development and tangentially connected disciplines. But, Agile principles are not limited strictly to IT applications, and our work with this organization exemplifies that.

The organization’s leadership wanted to solidify Agile principles and practices into their product development workflow so they could bring new and improved products to market faster. They knew that the existing framework, which had been so successful in the past, needed to pivot as competition sped up. Time that could previously be dedicated to management updates and approvals needed to be tightened up. Visibility into every stage of the workflow needed to be expanded. And, cross-team collaboration and problem solving needed to be elevated even further than it was.

If those challenges could be met and overcome, nothing would stand in the way of this organization achieving agility in product development.

A strong foundation for agility
To accomplish these lofty goals, Cprime laid out an aggressive training and coaching strategy designed to upskill the organization’s product development and support teams and get them thinking and working together in a more Agile way.

A series of workshops were held to introduce key Agile concepts as well as how Agile can be scaled to the enterprise level. Role-based workshops were also held to ensure the Scrum Masters and management teams were fully trained and ready to take on the task of leading this Agile transformation. Later in the engagement, Cprime coaches helped the teams develop strategic roadmaps for upcoming product launches, truly incorporating Product Agility into their robust existing product development workflow.

In addition to the formal workshops, Cprime coaches provided ad hoc assistance and support throughout the six months that have passed since the engagement began.

Strong results and a bright outlook
While this initial engagement is still too new to see quantifiable results, the anecdotal evidence is clear.

The organization’s teams are reporting strong execution with low variance using the new Agile processes. Stakeholders at all levels have much greater visibility into the work than they previously did, and that transparency supports continuous improvement. The team members recognize the benefits of a more collaborative atmosphere that empowers them to solve problems quickly and effectively. And, perhaps most importantly, the newly improved workflow has brought to light roadblocks in the existing processes that can now be addressed to achieve the faster speed to market that originated the organization’s need for this solution.

So, all stakeholders fully expect their new and improved products will make it to market faster as a direct result of their engagement with Cprime.

That’s why there’s no sign of the collaboration ending. Cprime’s Rita Emmons, the Business Agility Leader, working closely with the organization in recent months, has a significant roadmap of future enhancements in the works. And the organization’s leadership team are excited to see what the future holds as they pursue Enterprise Agility.











Case Study #40

Company Details
Industry: Software
Company Size: 300+ Employees
Location: California, United States
Products: Automation Software
Cprime Services:
Agile Transformation
Consulting
Executive Summary
The traditional waterfall development method and information silos were creating a competitive disadvantage for this software company. Following an Agile transformation led by Cprime experts, the Executive Sponsor is pleased with the results. “Now we have teamwork. We’re more aligned and it’s happening earlier in the process. It has eliminated the silos altogether.”


  
A Time for Change—Identifying Impediments
With a client list of over 1 million users, staying ahead of the curve is critical to the continued success of the company and its clients. It was time for a change, and the CEO saw an opportunity to make transformational and organizational changes—to get things moving faster.

Caught up in the waterfall
Reducing the protracted and testing-intensive development cycle was the core priority of the company’s newly-formed Excellence Team. Exacerbating its development bottlenecks, the company was also maintaining a legacy code debt while trying to innovate and expand its products without compromising the quality workflow automation tools it was known for.

“We were on a waterfall method with a yearly cadence, and that was proving to be too slow for the level of responsiveness we wanted to have to the market,” the Executive Sponsor summarizes.

The silo effect
Another issue that the company needed to address was the limited flow of information, especially between different departments within the organization. “We were pretty much operating in silos,” the Executive Sponsor said about the communications bottleneck. “Marketing did their thing, and engineering and sales did theirs.” This led to barriers between functions and no real collaborative framework.

With the CEO providing the impetus for change, it was the perfect time for the company to pursue Enterprise Agility and see how they could incorporate it into the whole organization to deliver best-in-class solutions for their customers.

“Cprime’s goal was to give the company’s product managers the tools they needed to take really big ideas and work on them in the right order so that, at any point, they could easily pivot. We wanted to emphasize the idea that Agile is not just about process… it’s about mindset.”
– Devin Anderson, Product Visionary and Strategist, Cprime
Embracing Agile and Moving Forward
The company began the shift to Agile by gathering teams of engineers and having them put together a presentation on why they should make the move. “We gathered the leadership and we said, ‘These are the benefits. This is what Agile is. This is where we are now. This is where we can be.’ When we were done, everyone bought into it,” recalls the Executive Sponsor.

With a move towards a more Agile process unanimously identified as the way forward, the company’s team began putting together a strategy to make it happen. Although they had several vendors under consideration, they turned to Cprime.

“We had used Cprime in the past and, in the end, they offered exactly what we were looking for—availability, workshops at the executive level, and the ability to scale to our needs,” explains the Executive Sponsor. “I got in contact and we set up training.”

Engaging with Cprime
“The company wanted to become more nimble and move toward Agile processes to shorten their long release and testing cycles, but they also had to deal with the concerns of their sales channels and partners and bring them along on the journey,” recalls Devin Anderson, Cprime Product Visionary and Strategist.

To identify and address the company’s needs, Cprime first met with the executive team during their corporate offsite. “We spent half a day discussing their mindset, and why they wanted to move to Agile and what it would mean for each of the departments,” Anderson says.

“After that,” he adds, “we facilitated assessments across the whole company that resulted in a roadmap consisting of training, workshops, and coaching.”

As a result of the assessments, the training was focused in two key areas: Agile for Executives and Product Discovery and Delivery with the coaching tailored to offer the greatest benefit to each area of the organization.

Going all-in—eyes wide open
With the executives on board and the recommendations from Cprime in hand, the company went all-in.

“Even at the executive level, they were just eyes wide open, and super engaged,” Anderson says. “They even made a very strategic hire when they brought in a new VP of Engineering. He had experience with Agile and was completely on board and a great champion for the process.”

“We started the training with a session of thirty engineers and product managers, and then the next month, another session of thirty,” explains the Executive Sponsor. “After we had all of Engineering and Product trained in Agile, we started rolling out to the other departments like marketing and sales.”

A global effort
Creating organization-wide change is no small task—the whole company was involved in the transformation—they even had teams in the UK and Japan who went through the training.

“Cprime engaged engineers, product managers and product owners,” explains Anderson. “We worked with the company at every level and across all of its different organizations. Coaches worked with sales and marketing to help them run agile practices within their teams—and adapted the principles to fit their requirements.”

Seeing Results with Agile
Training_Medium_black_coralAt this stage in the program with Cprime, the company is seeing many benefits. With Agile tools like Confluence and Jira in place, and a clear understanding across the company of how to use them effectively, the Executive Sponsor is pleased with the results. “Now we have teamwork. We’re more aligned and it’s happening earlier in the process. It has eliminated the silos altogether.”

The information cascade
Information exchange at the company has also improved—everyone from the top down has much better visibility into what they are working on. Like most companies, they wanted better cross-team communication and that’s really improved because of the frameworks Cprime provided for cross-functional collaboration.

Streamlining the decision-making process
Shifting responsibility down to the team level has also contributed to a more streamlined development and management process at the company. “All of our teams have their regular stand-ups,” says the Executive Sponsor. “We’re keeping up to date with each other on things, and if there are impediments, we try to make decisions to resolve them at the lowest level. We’re working faster and releasing on a more regular cadence, and our teams feel empowered.”

The commitment of the executive team has played a large role in the change. The shift to an agile mindset is being led from the executive level. From the top down there is alignment and focus on the strategic initiatives. And the alignment and focus is not just in Engineering. It’s in all aspects of the business.

The next steps
Transformation on an organizational scale is never complete. Despite the headway the company has made, the Executive Sponsor understands the company is still in the early days of its Agile journey.

“We’re trying to get the process all ironed out and we’re in transition right now. There is still redundancy in the meetings—like who attends them and what is discussed—but the meta scrum and the product owner cycle are helping us eliminate that.”

Beyond improving and expanding upon the processes they have in place, the company is improving their planning and reporting mechanisms. They’re working on defining exactly what metrics they want to track and further increasing their transparency. After that, they’ll move on to release planning.

Final Thoughts
While the numbers aren’t in yet, the foundations are in place and the company is seeing improvements across the board. Reflecting on her interactions with the Cprime team, and the outcomes, the Executive Sponsor is happy with the decision to partner with Cprime:

“It was really easy to work with Cprime. They’re genuinely experts in Agile methodology and, more importantly, the Agile mindset. I felt comfortable reaching out to them whenever I needed something and they were always there to help and answer questions.”
– Executive Sponsor from the Software Company











Case Study #41

Company Details
Industry: Banking, Finance
Company Size: 60,000 employees
Location: Scotland
Products: Finance and Insurance, Retail, Corporate, Investment, and Private Banking, Mortgages, Credit Cards
Cprime Services:
Agile Transformation
Consulting
Process Engineering
Executive Summary
Banking is a highly regulated and service-intensive industry. As a result of pressure to deliver continuously under these circumstances, the DevOps culture in the bank’s Payment division was under considerable strain. With the help of Cprime Agile and DevOps experts, they greatly reduced the time between deployments and dramatically improved the feedback loop to support CI/CD.


  
Overview
With revenue approaching 11 billion GBP in 2020 and nearly 55 years in the UK banking sector, this client is one of the leading clearing banks in the UK. Through an established group of partner and subsidiary banks, the organization provides commercial and private banking services to Western Europe, England, Wales, Scotland, and the Republic of Ireland.

Across its service area, the bank has a client base of around 13 million retail customers in addition to its corporate and investment clientele. Its online banking and payment applications alone see an average of 1.8 billion logins annually.

The Need to Get Things Done
Banking is a highly regulated and service-intensive industry. Behind the scenes, every bank depends on continuously developing and improving its in-house technology to stay at the top of the market. As a result of this pressure to deliver, the DevOps culture in the bank’s Payment division was under considerable strain.

“The Payment section had running projects that hadn’t delivered anything for years. They had projects underway that just weren’t prioritized based on value. Some of the key initiatives were under a significant amount of pressure from a compliance deadlines perspective. They were also struggling from a ‘getting things done’ perspective,” explains Mark Munnich, SAFe® Program Consultant and Delivery Director from Cprime.

Cprime Agile Coach Vipin Gupta adds, “The teams were delivering work in a waterfall manner. They weren’t shipping systems ready for their customers and franchisees to validate. When they did finally deliver systems, they had to wait for additional security and internal compliance checks as a post-development stage-gate process. That prompted the organization to think about how they could begin to deliver more initiatives on time with a clear understanding of customer value. They had attempted to adopt a more agile process at the team level based on their own understanding, but had never sought any expert help.”

Getting Started With Cprime—Understanding Processes
Realizing that its homegrown efforts at an agile methodology weren’t working, the bank turned to Cprime to aid its shift to the new age development strategy. After an initial consultation, the Cprime team set to work to understand the business and discover its pain points. They began by engaging selected platform leaders to clarify the scope of their work and ensure it aligned with the bank’s business objectives.

“In terms of agile development, the leaders didn’t recognize the value of prioritizing what teams needed to deliver,” says Gupta. “They needed help with how to manage upstream and downstream dependencies within and outside of their teams that were keeping them from delivering the right solution.”

At the team level, Cprime conducted agile health checks to assess the bank’s end-to-end delivery workflows, processes, and tools in use. “The health checks were a combined team effort. Asking questions related to their DevOps practices allowed us to establish the maturity level of our pilot teams. Those metrics established the overall baseline maturity level of the teams. That baseline formed the foundation of how we planned to engage with all of their teams going forward,” says Megha Mehta, DevOps Coach & Transformation Specialist.

“Cprime’s goal was to understand the bank’s development architecture and business objectives, come up with a template for success, then implement and scale it across the entire Payments section.”
– Rishabh Sood, DevOps Coach & Transformation Specialist
Developing an Agile Roadmap
After evaluating the results of the discovery process, Cprime focused its roadmap on improving two key areas: DevOps and WoW (Way of Working).

Streamlining DevOps
Cprime sought to improve the bank’s DevOps workflows by striking a balance between Development, QA, and Operations. To achieve this meant improving CI (continuous integration) pipeline maturity, DevOps tool integration, and, perhaps most importantly, deployment frequency.

The plan was to empower the bank’s feature teams to set up automated, autonomous CI pipelines, build up their literacy on DevOps best practices, and streamline their development practices with an emphasis on branching, merging, and release strategy. The ultimate goal was one-click deployments within each team and regular, predictable release cycles.

Improving WoW
When it came to WoW, the bank’s teams needed to enhance the skill set for their scrum masters and improve capacity understanding and estimation of work items at different levels. Fundamentally to do away with waterfall plans and a continuous feedback mechanism a) to embrace the flexible mindset, b) become predictable, and c) bring a culture of collaboration across all layers. They also needed training to use tools like Jira, Lean Kit, and Jenkins to their best advantage. In addition, the bank needed key stakeholders in place to drive change and prioritize their development backlog. Above all, they needed feature planning to conform with business objectives and future goals.

Making it Happen
“We took a few features teams and put together a foundational blueprint we could scale across the remaining platforms,” says Rishabh Sood. “It took seven months—The original plan was for 4 months wherein the first month was spent executing the DevOps health checks, analyzing the current maturity of the systems & DevOps processes. We then came up with a target operating model and a roadmap for the entire transformation journey. The next 3 months were earmarked for implementing the changes to meet the goals identified above. But it was at this point that we hit the company’s operational roadblocks which derailed this initiative and led to an overall delay of 3 months.

Clearing technical roadblocks
Before they could begin, however, the Cprime team had to address roadblocks with the bank’s web application firewall. The firewall approval process was fraught with unknowns that hindered development with a slow implementation process. Among the unknowns were non-standard processes for app proxy requests as well as a lack of ownership and the accountability to see errors made right. The Payment teams had issues with team dependencies between systems and infrastructures that resulted in further delays in the bank’s release cycle.

Overcoming transformation fatigue
“The platform leadership and initiative sponsors gave Cprime complete buy-in support and intended to remove impediments,” recalls Gupta. “But the bank had attempted similar transformations with varying success in the past. It took their teams some time to overcome transformation fatigue, to understand Cprime was in it for the long term, and to realize the value and benefits of what we were proposing. Once that occurred they were coming to us with requests and suggestions.”

Exchanging knowledge in bite-sized chunks
Knowledge is best dispensed in digestible pieces. “Initially we set up pipelines for the teams to show them best practices—to say to them, ‘This is a good CI pipeline and this is a good deployment process.’ Later we got them to do everything themselves, coming to us only for guidance. Finally, the teams led themselves by independently delivering the next set of pipelines and the deployment. We ramped them up with best practices and knowledge. That’s how we spent our six months,” says Sood.

In addition to providing the teams with practical, hands-on experience, Cprime developed a knowledge repository for future independent reference. It was a definitive Agile guide to everything covered in training. It contained everything from PI (program increment) planning readiness templates, metrics launch approaches, scrum and kanban transformation procedures, DevOps roadmaps, story writing and story point estimation guidelines, and target operating models for DevOps adoption.

Engaging at scale
Engaging with a large organization is no small undertaking. “We worked with 45 teams across 10 platforms. At its highest point there were 12 members on the Cprime team,” says Munnich. “Between the various platforms and portfolios, counting management, platform leaders, and features teams, there are 1,000 people across Payments—by the time we are done, we will have affected everyone in that part of the organization.”

Time zones added further complexity. “We had Cprime team members working with us from India, Singapore, and the UK. We all aligned our schedules with the teams at the bank to coach them during their business hours,” explains Mehta.

Adding up the Improvements
With its firewall issues behind it and training in full swing, the bank saw significant improvements over a period of six months. At the highest level, the participating teams’ software deployment cycles accelerated to 90 times per month, from a prior once per month. The teams had achieved the goal of delivering viable software in a predictable timeframe.

Likewise, the CI pipeline, the holy grail of agile software engineering, hit 71 percent from its health test baseline in the low 30s. This was no doubt aided by a new high of 67 percent in DevOps tools integration across teams that received the Cprime training. Prior to the Cprime training, the bank was unable to track these metrics.

Process improvements
In terms of WoW and agile processes, the teams have now integrated dev and test sprints, and sprint lengths have already halved—reduced to two weeks from a baseline of four to enable early feedback and value delivery. The trained teams are also much more collaborative and raise risks proactively in contrast to the bank’s early struggles to establish clear ownership and accountability for features under development.

Moving away from the waterfall model and reactive software development, teams are breaking down their work items and delivering value through Program Increments. Improved competence in user story integration with Jira further ensures that new feature development is in line with the bank’s strategic business goals and provides clear value to its customers.

To avoid reverting to bad habits, each team has also identified Agile change agents in the form of scrum masters and tech business analysts to keep the teams on track. In addition, the knowledge repository is always on hand to help train and educate new team members and collaborators in best practices and maintain development velocity.

Moving Forward With Cprime
Every member of the Cprime team is quick to point out that the transformation is still in its infancy and there are more improvements to come.

“The bank has a roadmap that takes us to the middle of next year, and then we focus on restructuring above the team level,” says Munnich. “That includes all the portfolio levels, and there are four levels that we need to get involved with above that. This is an ongoing initiative and we’ve discussed another two years’ worth of work to make the Payment section fully agile.”











Case study #42

Global Aerospace Leader Nails Huge Agile Transformation
Global Aerospace Leader Nails Huge Agile Transformation
Case Study Details
Industry: Aerospace

Highlights the power of Cprime’s Agile and SAFe® training and coaching programs:

In highly regulated industries
Outside of strictly software development environments
Under highly complex circumstances
When resistance to change might be an issue
Demonstrates:

How to effectively kickstart a SAFe® transformation
How to show quick incremental value and results
The value of in-person, “face-to-face” planning events
Key Agile Transformation Facts:

The organization explored agile for more than three years before establishing the transformation.
Cprime coaches included Aman Bhatia, Dan Teixeira, and Aaron Doperalski.
Training included Agile 101, SAFe® for Teams, Leading SAFe®
The first Program Increment (PI) planning event took place in April 2019. The in-person event involved nearly 100 team members.
Overview
This organization is one of just a handful of truly global players in the aerospace industry. With their core business surrounding the research, development, manufacturing, and testing of critical engines and other components for military and commercial airplanes worldwide, speed and efficiency take a necessary second place to safety, precision, and reliability. Still, the organization recognized that adopting an agile methodology would improve all these aspects of their business and more.

So, with the help of Cprime trainers and agile coaches, this aerospace leader taxied to a different runway. They adopted Scrum and have been sprinting since 2018, and they launched their first Program Increment (PI) in late April 2019. Here’s how and why they did it and a glimpse into the positive results they’re already experiencing even as this new and exciting journey begins.

The Downside of Success
For companies like this one, red tape and inertia are always near the top of their list of challenges. And, over the last few decades, numerous large corporations have struggled and watched their market share get siphoned off by smaller, more nimble competitors who were quicker to change with the times.

A considerable part of the organization’s success and industry-leading position stems from the practical application of cutting-edge technology, research, and development in aeronautical propulsion. However, their development timeline for new products had averaged around 20 years from concept to market. Leadership recognized this prolonged timeline as unsustainable in today’s hyper-competitive market.

A Cultural Shift was Needed
At this organization, there was a “command and control” culture that is typical in aerospace companies, which was hindering progress. This transformation focused on creating a culture that empowers employees to take risks, make bold moves, and even make mistakes. “People need empowerment to make decisions at their level,” the executive sponsor said. “It is important to build a culture where employees are entrusted and enabled to reach their maximum potential.”

The executive sponsor enrolled himself and 250 other leaders in a three-day leadership development program at Thayer Leader Development Group at West Point. They came away with a completely different perspective on management: from dictating to collaborating, and from “how we’ve always done it” to “how can we do it better?” The impact was widespread and immediate. As we’ll see, this top-down cultural shift toward collaboration and continual improvement led directly to the company’s agile adoption a short time later.

“Culture is what enables a company to be sustainable and profitable for a long time,” the executive sponsor said. “Organizational agility allows a company to better compete against current and future competitors.” The organization’s leadership team recognized that organizational agility and a culture that fosters innovation were vital to meeting the challenge of developing new technology and bringing it to market fast enough and consistently enough to maintain their leading role in the industry.

Going Agile Was a Natural Evolution
So, along with several other training initiatives and collaborative process improvements, it’s not surprising that this global aerospace leader began exploring adopting agile workflows across numerous research and production divisions. For example, in mid-2018, they created a division to act as a separate entity within the larger organization — run like a well-funded startup — specifically to bypass the internal red tape and bureaucracy they were still working on reducing. The division’s goal was to leverage commercial enterprise capabilities in rapid prototyping, iterative design, procurement, and testing of cutting-edge products for their customers. They created an environment where their best engineers can reach their potential with all the tools they need, but without the unnecessary internal barriers that can sometimes slow them down.

The 2019 Agile Transformation
Another major initiative the organization pursued was a complete agile transformation for one of its divisions. As a first step in rolling out this critical change, twelve component teams were selected for in-depth training and deployment by Q2 of 2019.

According to one of the company’s internal Agile champions, “We had started piloting agile three years ago, so we had tested the waters for a few years already. We saw that our customers were looking for a more collaborative and iterative process, and we had all the motivation we needed to go live.”

Challenges Leading Up to Launch
But, of course, there were challenges to overcome:

This is a highly regulated industry, and the products coming off their lines keep planes in the air. Their product certifications last 25 years. So, there was anxiety around changing development and production workflows to speed the process.
They couldn’t shut down divisions to accommodate a massive training and workflow integration program, so they had to maintain production while incorporating the necessary programs.
Finally, there was a general skepticism surrounding Agile based on a lack of knowledge and some important misconceptions around the methodology frameworks. This led to initial resistance from many long-term workers who felt threatened by process changes they perceived as changing their roles and value in the organization.
One leader recalled, “These were all people with almost no agile background or knowledge, and with often decades of entrenchment in their current ways of getting things done. Finally, we needed to effectively address the complexity of the system we were hoping to change and ensure we had a proper support system in place. After all, we were trying to pull off a major cultural and process shift, all while maintaining production levels.”

Facing these challenges required long-term planning, intensive training, and the help of seasoned and experienced agile coaches to “steer the ship” effectively during the transition.

Reaching Out to Cprime for Help
The leader continues, “We decided early on to go with the SAFe® framework and ran our early pilots accordingly. Months before the program was scheduled to go live, we spent a lot of time figuring out how to best plan our Agile Release Trains (ARTs), identify dependencies, inputs, and bottlenecks. And, we needed to look for that perfect balance between change and normalcy that we knew we needed to achieve.”

He had been in attendance at Cprime’s Agile 101 course. He recommended partnering with Cprime to lead training
and ongoing coaching as the program kicked off. Cprime Agile coaches Dan Teixeira and Aaron Doperalski ended up
adapting three different training courses to the organization’s unique circumstances (Agile 101, SAFe® for Teams, and Leading SAFe®) and handling ad hoc individual and team coaching needs as they arose.

They settled on a hybrid approach in which all twelve component teams would make up one ART, using month-long sprints and a three-month Program Increment (PI). Each component team would be considered an Agile Team in this arrangement, responsible for their daily standups, etc. However, the full ART needed to get together for a face-to-face PI Planning Meeting every three months, with the first one scheduled for April 2019.

The First PI Planning Event was a Huge Success
Despite the practical challenges they faced and the mental and emotional resistance that always accompanies change, the two-day PI Planning Meeting proved a massive success.

Attendees at all levels voiced very similar feedback as the event was wrapping up:

They felt far better integrated with stakeholders and shared services.
They had a much clearer plan for how the work would flow over time, including solid milestones to shoot for and clear definitions of when the teams reached them.
They had a better understanding of dependencies and related opportunities for organizational changes.
They could see the new workflows would significantly improve engagement and collaboration.
They felt heard and understood, with everyone having had a chance to discuss wants and needs within the framework of the team’s unified goals.
Perhaps most importantly, everyone felt the whole department was “on the same page at the same time” like never before.
During the closing retrospective discussion, there were no negative comments noted and all suggestions for improvement were positive and constructive. Team members left looking forward to accomplishing what they’d set out to do and reconvening in three months to repeat the process.

The Results
“I couldn’t have hoped for a better result,” one executive sponsor concluded, “and Cprime was a huge part of that. This is a tough business to come into and orchestrate change. A lot of these engineers are very stuck in their ways. But, the trainers from Cprime were easy to work with, and, most importantly, they got buy-in, which is what really made all the difference.”

With the first PI Planning event completed and teams hard at work at their first sprints, the focus switched to “Day in the Life” training and coaching, custom-tailored by Cprime to respond to the organization’s specific needs and challenges. This effort continued through the initial three-month PI. Additionally, the organization had Cprime train internal SAFe® Program Consultants (SPCs) to facilitate duplication of the success in their other divisions.











Case Study #43

Company Details
Industry: Energy
Company Size: 2,200 Employees
Location: CA, US
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Migrations and Services
Jira Align Consulting
Atlassian Cloud
Executive Summary
This company needed to streamline the efforts of the 150-person DevOps teams responsible for the organization’s websites, payment portals, and electricity transfer management software. The company needed increased agility and more robust reporting capabilities.


  
The Overview
Let There be Light
Providing power to more than 1.5 million people, this California-based utility company is at the forefront of developing innovative power solutions and adopting emerging technologies. Its goal is to ensure a carbon-neutral future for the households and businesses it serves. The utility company wants to empower its customers to participate in an innovative, modern electric grid. Its strategy involves aggressively adopting distributed energy resources (DERs) and rethinking its reliance on traditional systems and fuel sources while improving moment-to-moment grid operation and future resource planning.

The Challenge
A Matter of Security
With aggressive innovation comes aggressive development schedules. To streamline the efforts of the 150-person DevOps team responsible for the organization’s websites, payment portals, and electricity transfer management software, the company needed increased agility and more robust reporting capabilities. Initially, the requirement seemed straightforward—extend the capabilities of the in-house Jira Data Center by connecting to Jira Align, the real-time Atlassian tool that links development strategy to execution. The reality, however, was more complex: “The utility company had a very specific use case,” explains Chuck Badger, Account Executive at Cprime. “Jira Align is a cloud-based portfolio tool that connects to Jira, but the only way for it to talk to the servers on-prem was through a connector that broke through their firewall. As a result, it didn’t meet the in-house security compliance requirements.” So before the utility company could implement Jira Align, it needed to pivot to address the compliance issue.

The Solution
Jira Cloud – Creating An Atlassian Ecosystem
The utility company decided to solve the compliance issue by connecting Jira Align and Jira Cloud— and integrating them outside the company network. Achieving this involved migrating the on-prem Jira Data Center to Jira Cloud hosted on AWS and connecting it with Jira Align. “By moving the onprem server to the cloud, Jira Align and Jira Cloud could talk to each other without breaching the firewall,” Badger clarifies.

Having determined that moving the data center to the cloud was the way forward, there was a final hurdle the utility company had to overcome—it had to find a migration specialist. “Atlassian doesn’t do in-house migrations,” explains Catherine Harrell, Delivery Manager for Cprime. “They recommend Atlassian Platinum Partners for that, and Cprime is the most experienced of them.”

Leaving a Long-Standing Relationship
Evaluating its choices, the utility company reached out to Jira-certified Cprime to ensure the seamless migration of Jira on-prem to Jira Cloud. Trust is critical, especially when it comes to enterprise data. The company selected Cprime for its qualifications, but there was an additional motivator: “We are long-standing historical partners.

Cprime has been consulting with the company for years,” says Badger. “We’ve done good work there. They trust us.” A solid relationship can be key to the success of a project.



Establishing the Strategy
With the contracts signed, Cprime’s two-person migration team established a project strategy that kept the client both informed and involved. “During onboarding, we said, ‘Here’s the timeline, here’s our budget, here’s what we’re going to do.’ Once that was done, we moved forward,” says Harrell. To keep the stakeholders in the loop and drive progress, Harrell also followed up with status reports and regular meetings. “I met with the client once a week to stay on top of the schedule.”

” The plan was unusually straightforward. “We always do a test migration,” Harrell explains. “But, in this case, since we were creating a brand new cloud instance, we did the test migration directly to the target instance rather than creating a test instance. We simply migrated the source—the on-prem data center—directly.”

The Results
Improving on an Aggressive Timeline
Migrating directly to a clean cloud environment had obvious benefits, particularly in terms of cutting down on the project duration. “The original timeline was seven weeks for the migration, including a week of user acceptance testing,” recalls Harrell, “but we managed to do the migration in just over four weeks. Normally we quote about three months to complete a migration, but this time our engineer, Francisco Olselame, performed it in just over a month. All in, the project took thirty-two days from start to finish. The client was impressed with the short time frame.”

More significantly, the quality of the cloud data center was first-class from the outset. “Often if a migration is done that quickly, there are errors, but this one was done very well and few issues arose despite a rigorous testing period,” Harrell says.

A Job Well Done
For the utility company, the project was a clear success. The Jira Cloud was ready ahead of schedule. “They were very happy with the move to the cloud. Everything went great and there were no real issues reported,” recounts Badger, summarizing the customer feedback he received.

From the migration team’s perspective, the experience was pure textbook.










Case Study #44

Company Details
Industry: Financial Services
Company Size: 7,500 Employees
Location: DC, US
Cprime Services:
Enterprise Dojo Solutions
DevOps Solutions
Executive Summary
The organization faced regulatory challenges and deadlines that limited its accomplishments and growth for several years. They made great strides to improve their operations over the next ten years, but there was still much to do. They knew that a big part of their ongoing strategy would be a tremendous digital transformation. They also saw on the horizon that budgetary adjustments would require a significant reduction in headcount.


  
Overview
One of the Biggest and Best at What they do
This large lending organization has worked with Cprime coaches for over two years, running an immersive internal learning environment known as an Enterprise Dojo. In the following case study, we will dive into the impetus behind the engagement, the challenges that needed to be overcome, how Cprime coaches solved those challenges, and what the organization has achieved as a result.

This company is one of the largest in the U.S. in terms of total assets with over $3.5 trillion. Focused primarily on mortgage securities, millions of Americans rely on them to support and manage the funding that makes homeownership possible. With such a vital role in the nation’s economy and the lives of so many people, the company places a high priority on producing consistent value for their customers, maintaining a high level of quality in all operations, and supporting business agility.

The Challenges
From Recession to Progression
Like so many other organizations in the housing market, the industry’s collapse during the 2007/08 downturn and subsequent recession left the company reeling. The organization faced regulatory challenges and deadlines that limited its accomplishments and growth for several years. They made great strides to improve their operations over the next ten years, but there was still much to do. They knew that a big part of their ongoing strategy would be a tremendous digital transformation. They also saw on the horizon that budgetary adjustments would require a significant reduction in headcount.

So, with an initial goal of exploring and preparing for a large-scale systems migration to the cloud, they sought out frameworks for training and consulting help to get their migration up and running. Importantly, as they explored options for facilitating their digital transformation, they became aware of the Dojo program pioneered at Target and enabled by Cprime Product Agility. They were impressed by the immersive quality of the Enterprise Dojo and the fact that, unlike standard training classes, the approach revolves around learning and applying the lessons by working on actual tasks from the teams’ backlogs.

They reached out to Cprime to help set up an Enterprise Dojo to rapidly bring their teams up to speed in preparation for their cloud migration. Once Cprime experts arrived on site, the full scope of the challenge came to light:

With a wide array of teams going through the Dojo, the full gamut of Agile maturity was represented. The client had many topics they wanted to cover in the Dojo — from adopting and adapting agile to getting teams into a full site reliability engineering practice — requiring multiple coaching skill sets.
The organization had already been through several transformations. Sentiment for additional training and coaching wasn’t exactly high. Cprime coaches quickly discovered the need to differentiate the Dojo as a new and productive model for learning new product and engineering skills.
As time went on, the organization actively changed the purpose of the Dojo to align with updated goals and business objectives.
In all these cases, however, ingenuity on the part of the coaches and a real sense of trust and partnership allowed Cprime to overcome the challenges as they provided a set of solutions that continues to stand the test of time.


The Solution
Creating A Unique Experience to Fit Their Needs
The stakeholders at this company had already visited the Target Dojo and had an idea of what to expect, but it was vital to ensure that this wasn’t just a carbon copy. Instead, we wanted to provide an experience customized to their unique needs and objectives. So, we started with a proof of concept pilot program involving a few teams with different skill sets and varying experience levels. The most immediate goal for the Dojo was to quickly upskill their development teams in preparation for what would be a significant migration to the cloud.

This was in the midst of a slow-and-steady digital transformation that had defined the engineering org’s path for some time. They needed to see clear improvement in general team maturity and technical due diligence to counteract these pressures. The Dojo concept quickly became a rallying point for them in their effort to overcome this nagging challenge and move forward.

The Pilot Program
After just three months, the teams involved had clearly honed their skills. They were fired up to get back to work and keep rolling with the new skills they’d learned. Coming out of that pilot, we’d learned a lot about the organization, their culture, and what was driving their desire to change and improve.

Additionally, one of the teams had a real breakthrough during the pilot program that added impetus to much of what followed. In an effort to apply the customer value-centered product mindset we preach, this team brought in an actual customer (a mortgage security trader from the local area) to weigh in on a particular workflow they were tasked with re-engineering. In just a few short discussions, they were able to streamline the process dramatically based solely on what the customer wanted and needed rather than “the way they had always done it.” The resulting workflow saved tremendous time for the engineers and customers alike.

Training Internal Coaches
Additionally, right from the beginning, the organization tasked us with bringing their own relatively new coaches up to speed to eventually run teams through the Dojo in parallel with the teams we would be running. So, that could have presented a logistical challenge as it could have split the focus of our coaches running the Dojos.

The First Nine Months
Following the successful pilot, Cprime launched the initial Dojo program — four teams running concurrently during each six-week challenge — focusing on building a product mindset among the teams. We wanted the teams to fully understand the roles of the product owner and product manager: what they do, how they collaborate, and how they could support each other as they moved from “doing projects” to building products.

While the initial charter wanted us to focus on building automation, pipelines and embracing DevOps culture, we realized early on that there was more of a need for fundamental engineering skills in testing strategies, code quality, and social approaches to software development. Cprime coaches worked with the client to shift their priorities to a focus on engineering principles.

As a result, we did not spend much time on DevOps skills in the early iterations. However, we did collaborate with their DevOps leadership to make sure they could support the teams coming out of the Dojo and be aware of what changes they could expect as the teams applied what they learned.

During this period, as part of a more extensive internal reorganization, the company allowed many contractor contracts to lapse and concentrated on employing and developing full-time talent. The Dojo fit very well into that strategy. We were able to help existing internal team members improve their productivity to help weather the loss of external help in the short term and bring new team members up to speed quickly shortly after the company hired them. We were also thrilled to see the excitement build internally around the Dojo. While we were still on-premises (pre-pandemic), alumni often returned to talk with the Dojo teams and view what we were working on at the weekly share events. A real Community of Practice was forming.

The Following 18 Months and Beyond
By the end of 2019, we’d worked through all the initial teams the company wanted to see go through the Dojo, and they’d had time to watch the teams mature dramatically as a result of the experience.

At that point, we overhauled the menu of skills we were focusing on in the Dojo. Rather than foundational product mindset and supporting skills, we began to hyperfocus on those DevOps areas the teams needed most. Google SRE, DevOps pipelines, cloud enablement, and a host of other subjects became the focus of the experience.

Before approaching these subjects in the Dojo, the company’s enablement program was relatively thin and lacked practical application of the material. Although teams had been given the tools they needed to do the work, they had little in the way of practice or internal subject matter expertise to rely on. We brought the individuals handling that enablement into the Dojo to benefit from the coaching and experience we were bringing to the table and learn more effective ways to enhance the enablement experience outside the Dojo.

To facilitate this dramatic change in our offering, we had to rethink how we handled technical coach staffing for these Dojos. We needed to rotate some coaches out and others in without disrupting the ongoing program. We began to see the same teams who had been through the initial Dojo six or eight months before coming back through to focus on these new skills. Without a doubt, the teams had matured dramatically since their previous challenges, so they attacked this new iteration enthusiastically. Likewise, internal coaches had to be brought up to speed on the latest offerings to continue adding value in their role.

In its most recent iteration, we see teams coming through the Dojo a third time. And, at this point, their maturity level is so high, they’re showing impressive autonomy and problem-solving skills. They can receive a very loose problem or idea and do all the necessary work to break it down into an ordered and sized backlog centered around the user or a business impact. They can run with it all the way to shipping it into production and responding to any incidents that occur post-production.

Thus far, eight Cprime coaches have worked with over 150 team members in the Dojo, some three times in two years. This is a longer-running Dojo engagement than average, and there’s no plan yet to scale it down or stop. We are discussing the possibility of scaling the program up to include the entire enterprise.

The Results
The Numbers Don’t Lie
The results this company has seen from the Dojo have been nothing short of remarkable.

Product owners and managers emerged with increased role clarity around product ownership and operating as autonomous product teams connected to their customers, which served as a foundation for tremendous improvements.
An estimated 67% increase in throughput efficiency – Following a dramatic reduction in contractor assistance, the newly-upskilled internal teams were able to maintain the same overall throughput with a team one-third the size.
Faster release cadence – Before the Dojos, the teams released quarterly. Now, releases go out two or three times per week. The quicker they release, the smoother the release goes and the faster they can start getting feedback and iterating to improve continually.
25% reduction in cycle times – This is truly a phenomenal number, and it’s an average across all the teams who have gone through the Dojo. So, some of the higher-performing teams are seeing even greater increases in speed and productivity.
200% increase in unit test inventory – This speaks to the incredible leap in maturity most teams have made. Unit test inventory is a practical way to measure how much work each team is shipping and how effectively they’re testing the product before it heads into production.
15% reduction in end-to-end tests – Hand-in-hand with the above metric, by reducing the number of end-to-end tests and increasing unit testing, the teams are improving the efficiency of their delivery processes while maintaining the same high standard for quality.
Perhaps the most impressive results of the Dojo program at this organization are less quantifiable, but our coaches have heard and experienced it, as have stakeholders within the company. There’s a notable improvement in morale, camaraderie, and enthusiasm that now permeates the teams. One team member expressed it best when he said, “we went into the Dojo as a team, but we came out as a family.”












Case Study #45

Company Details
Industry: Education Technology
Company Size: 500+ Employees
Location: NY, US
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Migration and Updates
Slack Consulting
Executive Summary
After acquiring multiple companies, the organization needed help consolidating four Slack Workspaces into one. Each work space had been working together for a long time and contained many shared channels which they didn't want to lose. Working with Cprime Slack consultants, all workspaces were consolidated, saving a lot on licensing costs and enhancing organizational collaboration.


  
The Overview
Solutions that Help Educators Across the Country
The organization operates a platform of digital and SaaS educational solutions. They focus on developing digital curriculum, learning analytics technologies, online program management, and educator professional development services. They serve students, teachers, and educators in the United States.

The Challenge
A Need For a Unified Company Culture
Recently, the organization successfully acquired several other companies. While these acquisitions were a big win for the company, some growing pains quickly emerged.



To this end, the company aimed to merge all four Slack Workspaces into one. But as McNeal explained, this process was easier said than done. For one thing, each acquired company had been working together in Slack for a long time. As a result, each Workspace contained many shared channels and work history, which the organization didn’t want to lose. “The company wanted to keep a good bit of history because people do their work in Slack now, and it’s really important to preserve that,” McNeal said.

The Solution
Enter Cprime
Following a recommendation from Slack, the organization enlisted Cprime’s help to guide the consolidation from four Slack Workspaces to one. “We came recommended, but I think we brought our expertise to the table, and the company appreciated it so much,” McNeal said. After agreeing to complete the consolidation in six weeks, the teams got straight to work.

Thinking Things Through to Navigate Complexity
Before merging anything, Cprime conducted an assessment and health check of the four Slack Workspaces. Cprime also consulted with the organization about how the company wanted to govern its unified Slack Workspace in the future. For example, Cprime initiated conversations about how the company would name its Slack channels, what it would designate as best practices for communicating within those channels, and how it would delineate between public and private information on Slack.

“We really brought our best practices to the table. Then, we helped the company develop the framework it needed to move forward to be successful with its communication in Slack,” McNeal said.

From a technical standpoint, the consolidation was unusually complex. McNeal explained that while many organizations have 10 to 15 shared Slack channels, the organization had close to 300. “We even heard from the Slack engineers that this consolidation was more complicated than many they had executed themselves,” said McNeal. Cprime wrote custom scripts to help automate channel renaming, which alleviated some manual work for the organization. Cprime also assisted with mapping users so that all user information from the company’s pre-merger Slack Workspaces would carry over to the new, unified Slack Workspace. During this process, many employees were assigned unique usernames and email addresses, and they needed these aliases to retain their former data.

Finally, Cprime ensured that all the company’s apps were installed and working as expected post-migration.

The Results
Saving Money and Fostering Connections
By consolidating four Slack Workspaces into one, the organization dramatically reduced its licensing costs. “Now, the company’s only paying for one Workspace rather than four,” McNeal explained. “It has everybody communicating on the same platform, which helps enhance its company culture and organizational structure to have a central platform for folks to do their work.” From an employee engagement perspective, McNeal said the company’s post-migration communication is much less siloed. With just one Slack Workspace, it’s much easier for employees to find files and connect with other team members.“And overall, being able to participate with everybody in the same space kind of gives you the warm fuzzies, right?” said McNeal.

A Repeated Engagement
The organization recently asked Cprime to guide another Slack consolidation. “I think it speaks to our work that the company came back to us for another one,” McNeal said. “We worked really well together. We communicated often, leveraged Slack for troubleshooting help, and were very responsive,” she added. “Cprime comes with Slack best practices, and we have the knowledge and experience to help clients institute governance,” said McNeal. “We’ve helped organizations before, and we can help clients learn from the experiences that we’ve had.”





Case Study #47

Company Details
Industry: Financial Services
Company Size: 11,000+ Employees
Location: NY, US
Cprime Services:
Rally to Jira Migration
Atlassian Migration and Updates
Atlassian Consulting
SAFe® Consulting
Executive Summary
This financial company wanted to improve the coordination of their work, help employees manage and release code in an organized fashion, and enable the reuse of strategic technology for multiple purposes. Partnering with Cprime consultants, they pursued an urgent migration from Rally to Jira that streamlined and consolidated the work of numerous teams and led to high adoption and user support.


  
Overview
Over Two Hundred Years Old and Becoming Agile
This company has been in the insurance business for nearly two centuries and operates in all U.S. states and internationally. They offer life insurance, retirement income, long-term care, investments, and premier services. With plans for an eventual migration from Rally to Jira, the company began consultations and Agile coaching with Cprime. When they learned their Rally license was expiring within a month, Cprime quickly pivoted from exploration to migration—pulling off a transformation in record time.

The Challenge
A Need for More Transparency
In 2018, the company was operating with Rally. But they’d encountered various issues while using this platform and reached out to Cprime for help.

“The company was unclear of their breakdown of work,” said Dan Teixeira, Cprime’s East Region General Manager. “They had business stakeholders bombarding teams from all different points of view and lacked a consolidated view in roadmap and backlog.”

They wanted to improve the coordination of their work, help employees manage and release code in an organized fashion, and enable the reuse of strategic technology for multiple purposes. They also hoped to reconcile their Agile and waterfall teams in a single platform. And so, the company decided the Atlassian suite of tools would be a better fit than Rally. In consultation with Cprime, they began plotting a migration from Rally to Jira Software Cloud.

“We originally looked at everything from a higher-level perspective,” said Cprime Solutions Architect, Briana Hall. Cprime took a deep dive into what the company’s Agile and waterfall teams would require during this transition and looked into further integrations and plug-ins. Gradually, Cprime carefully laid the groundwork for the company’s eventual migration to Atlassian Cloud. Cprime helped them consider the architecture and structure they wanted to be set up within Jira, all while coaching the company on Agile best practices for moving forward. But then—amid all this planning—both Cprime and the company faced a major curveball.

A Tight, Two-Week Timeline
Migration_Medium_black_coral

In mid-February, the company discovered their license for Rally was expiring at the end of the month.“All of a sudden, the migration became very real,” said Pavel Fomin, Cprime’s Director of Engineering for Cloud Migrations. “Rally doesn’t let you license month to month. They don’t let you downgrade—it’s one year or three years,” he explained. “So the company decided it was time to move. And we had to make the move within two weeks.”Fomin said these kinds of migrations typically occur over a period of six to 12 weeks.So initially, the tight timeline gave Cprime pause. “We kind of did a double-take,” said Briana Hall. “Like—’wait, what?’ But then we shifted gears completely and went from discovery to migration mode.”

The Solution
Making Data Move Faster
Hall explained that moving from Rally to Jira Cloud isn’t straightforward. There are significant differences in how the systems organize data and handle objects. But because Hall was involved in Cprime’s earlier coaching with the company—and because she knew their plans for the future—she could help with mapping and architecture decisions during the migration.

Fomin led the migration from a technical standpoint and navigated various hurdles throughout the transition. For instance, he had to contend with importing 500,000 tickets from Rally to Jira—a number further complicated because, in Rally, each ticket can contain 200-300 revision history items. Fomin decided that importing each ticket’s revision history into Jira just wasn’t feasible. Instead, Cprime provided the company with revision history data extracts for audit compliance. This way, the tickets could be imported into Jira much more quickly. “That was a winner in my book,” Fomin said, “because otherwise, we would still be loading that data.” Another migration hurdle involved the import of large data sets. Initially, it took Cprime about an hour to import 8,000 tickets, which didn’t bode well for their fast-tracked timeline. Fomin’s team first adapted by splitting all their backups into multiple files, but this created its own set of issues.

Eventually, they settled on a different solution on Friday at midnight: they would import all the files on a temporary server environment. Thankfully, Fomin’s team made all the backups before the company’s access to Rally was cut off that Sunday. “We shared that with the client. It was a great success,” Fomin said. After learning about the sudden, urgent timeline, Hall said Cprime and the company were essentially in contact daily. “Initially, they were very nervous about this whole effort. They asked us several times for reassurance, wondering if the plan was reasonable. But we had many discussions, and I think they felt very supported and taken care of,” Hall said.

About 1,000 employees at the company were also waiting in the wings to operate the system. Cprime provided upfront training materials and sessions with employees to guide and support them throughout the migration.

The Results
Relationship Building is Key
Now that the company has migrated to an Atlassian Cloud set of tools, Dan Teixeira said they have become much more transparent in both workflow and teams and are well-positioned for future initiatives. In partnering with Cprime, Teixeira also believes the company gained a trusted Agile advisor—and that Cprime empowered the company to become “Agile mindset champions” moving forward.

After integrating users into the system, the company began noticing high engagement amongst its employees. Because the migration happened quickly, the company felt more of a buzz and sense of urgency about the transition. One company employee told Hall he was almost glad the migration occurred this way.

According to Hall, a big part of the migration’s success was the pre-existing working relationships.

“I think communication and trust are really what made our partnership with the company successful. We worked with them regularly, which helped them build their trust in us. So when it came time for this very challenging transformation, they knew they were in good hands. They became Cprime’s top priority for those two weeks. And so we were laser-focused on the migration and seeing it through to completion.” – Briana Hall, Solutions Architect at Cprime

Looking Forward to Continual Transformation
Post-migration, Cprime is continuing its work with the company. Hall said “they’ll optimize the system by integrating additional tools, all while aligning their Agile and waterfall teams as much as possible.”










Case Study #48

Company Details
Industry: Insurance
Company Size: 30,000 employees plus 13,500 independent brokers and agents
Location: New York, United States
Products: Personal and Commercial Casualty Insurance
Cprime Services:
Enterprise Dojo
Training/Coaching
Executive Summary
Consulting in partnership with senior leaders, the Cprime training team tailored and conducted a highly successful bespoke Dojo program focusing on advanced Agile methodologies to improve the company’s development cycle times, increase testing coverage and optimize the conversion of legacy code.


  
Highlights of Engagement
Consulting in partnership with senior leaders, the Cprime training team tailored and conducted a highly successful bespoke Dojo program focusing on advanced Agile methodologies to improve the company’s development cycle times, increase testing coverage and optimize the conversion of legacy code.

Overview
The company is a leading underwriter of commercial property-casualty insurance in the US and operates a large national personal insurance business through independent agents across the US. A Fortune 100 organization, they have an extensive international portfolio as well.

Through its network of nearly 50,000 employees, independent agents, and brokers, the company has established a solid reputation in the industry. Making the best of available technologies is how they remain at the top of their game and responsive to their clients’ needs.

The Challenge – Establishing Dojo Goals: The Wish List
In alignment with the company’s mandate for excellence in software development, a group of three executive sponsors sought to improve engineering practices. Their goal was clear: while they had already adopted Agile methodologies, they wanted to take their DevOps to a higher level, referred to internally as Agile 2.0.

Clarifying the mission, one sponsor explains the impetus to implement more current, modern practices. In particular, the company was shifting from a ‘write code now and test later’ ethos to the philosophy that code alone was not acceptable until a corresponding test mechanism accompanied it:

“Our teams were doing well writing code, but we wanted to mature them in writing tests, which was not that important three or four years ago. Now, however, for us, ‘code’ is the combination of both tests and code. Before, we’d throw the code over to the other side to be tested, but we wanted to change that. And to do that, we found that practices like test-driven development and pairing were key to achieving this maturity.”

Reducing the Development Cycle
In addition to maturing its processes, the company was looking to streamline its development cycle to match the accelerated timelines that are increasingly the norm in software development.

“We’re at the point now where instead of delivering things four times a year, we need to deliver much more quickly,” says one executive sponsor. “We used to have a lot more lead time. We wrote code, we tested, and two months later, we put it in production. Those days are gone. We need to test now at all levels.”

There was one final but significant pain point that the development team needed to address. It was common to most large enterprises with an established codebase: Breaking down legacy code to make it modern.

Keeping It Close to Home
The company needed more than simple classroom training. The team wanted a way to improve their practice, but they wanted it done onsite, in a non-disruptive manner that addressed their developers’ real-world work assignments and timelines.

As another executive sponsor put it, “We wanted someone to come to us and work with our teams on the things they had on their plates at the time. We couldn’t keep sending teams somewhere to be trained. We couldn’t scale that. We wanted to get the trainer in-house, on the floor.”

The Solution – Enter Cprime
The company knew it wanted a tailored, immersive, and experiential learning experience, but it wasn’t sure how to go about it on a larger scale. Finally, the team approached Cprime, trusted partners and experts in helping transforming businesses get in sync and redefine how work gets done through Agile, Product, and Technology. An executive sponsor admits:

“I fully expected Cprime to say, ‘We can’t help you because your situation isn’t perfect,’ but the team didn’t. They came back and said, ‘We can figure this out.’ And they did.”

The Place of the Way
Presented with the challenge of finding the best solution for the company’s unique requirements, Cprime responded with an on-site Dojo program. The Japanese term “dojo” literally means “the place of the way.” In DevOps terms, a Dojo is a physical and metaphorical safe space where teams can collaborate with embedded experts to learn Agile principles, improve software development processes, or embrace new frameworks and tools.

“We knew we wanted to adopt emerging best practices in software development, but we didn’t know how to go about it in a way that ticked all our boxes. Cprime took on our challenge and responded with, ‘This is how we can help you learn these practices with the scenarios you have.’”
– Executive Sponsor at the company
Dave Laribee, Head of Dojos and Strategic Advisor for Cprime, recalls the challenges the company brought to the table and summarizes the Cprime solution. “We aligned a couple of their COEs (Centers of Excellence) around engineering practices and set out working to improve their approach to test-driven development, acceptance test-driven development, and pair programming with an eye to gains in their team-level agility and their overall quality, productivity, and efficiency.”

As Laribee discovered, the group at the company was already well-versed in SAFe® (Scaled Agile Framework). They required a deeper dive into the engineering best practices that would get them to the next level of agility and shift them toward product-driven development. To Laribee, this meant focusing on “transitioning the teams from features teams, operating from a backlog to teams given something at a higher level, like an idea or problem level or a user journey level and fully empowered to run with it.”

An Open Menu
Asked to summarize the focus the Dojo sessions took, Laribee explains that it varied from group to group. It also depended on the specific needs the trainers from Cprime and the group itself identified:

“Depending on the group, they wanted pair programming, mob programming, TDD. They went into domain-driven design and C4 modeling. We did story maps and journeys and created opportunities for customer feedback and feedback-driven planning as well as data-driven planning. If you look at a Dojo as a menu of things we could do for a team, they ordered everything on the menu and ordered off the menu. They went full tilt.”

“In planning the Dojo sessions, we worked closely with stakeholders who deeply cared about the planning, tracking, and the overall process. Together we made sure that we weren’t disrupting too much and were able to create the headroom for learning what a Dojo requires.”
– Dave Laribee, Head of Dojos, Cprime
Taming the Legacy
The Dojo experience also made a significant contribution toward enabling the company to manage the technical debt on their legacy code—a 12-year-old application written in various languages. In this difficult-to-maneuver environment, the Cprime team focused on unbundling TDD practices and applying them to the legacy ecosystem, introducing refactoring skills and the ‘view presenter model’ pattern.

The result allowed the development team to introduce value to their process and work with more thoughtful design practices. Says Laribee, “Their test suite went from dozens of tests in a module to hundreds of tests—and they ran the module all the time in our CI (continuous integration) pipeline.”

The Results – Deconstructing the Dojo: Seeing Results
Success in a Dojo depends on dedication to the process on the part of the teams, trainers, and company leadership. As Laribee recalls, “The whole feedback loop, between not only the teams and the coaches, but also their leadership and our leadership was just phenomenal.”

Perhaps the greatest indicator of the Dojo program’s success is that the initial plan for two Cprime Dojo sessions rapidly expanded to seven. Buy-in amongst leadership and the participants was so strong that, due to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the final sessions were successfully conducted online—something no one involved believed possible from either a technical or motivational perspective.

Recognizing the value of the Dojo as an agent for change, the executive sponsors remain committed to continuing the development of their people and teams, even going as far as embedding one of their own in the training program in a train-the-trainer approach.

“We had one of our people go into the Dojo, work with the team that was being coached, and learn from the coach,” explains one sponsor. “It has the potential to be something that we could do internally, or at least take some of the elements that we learned in the Dojo and apply them towards teams moving forward.”

When it comes to the numbers, according to Laribee, he says he has seen the Dojo experience reduce cycle times to market on MVP (minimum viable product) as much as 25 to 50%, with even greater gains in the test suite of up to 10 times more tests generated. Equally significant are the increases in efficiency that slash the numbers on story times.

For the company, however, the gains are most evident in cultural terms. An executive sponsor explains how the Dojo has positively affected the organization’s DevOps resources:

“They became believers. They are continuing with the things they learned. That tells you our people consider what they learned valuable. It’s not just something we’re telling them to do. They wouldn’t keep doing it if they didn’t think it was worthwhile.”












Case Study #49

Company Details
Industry: Information Technology
Company Size: 400 Employees
Location: GA, US
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Migration
Jira Align Consulting
SAFe Consulting
Executive Summary
A marketing tech leader needed increased visibility and a common Agile framework. Cprime provided careful guidance, helping establish product agility practices, adopt a SAFe® Framework, and migrate to Jira Align.


  
Overview – Strengthening Customer Relationships from The US to The UK
Through their partnerships with large companies in the US and UK, the organization derives anonymized data and purchase insights for marketers. Their connected rewards programs also promote customer loyalty and strengthen consumer relationships. Marketers can then deliver targeted ads to customers using a native ad platform hosted inside the client’s digital channels. Consumers, in turn, receive personalized offers and rewards to help them save money. As pioneers in the personalized advertising space, this company is becoming increasingly popular with customers and marketers alike. They have about 500 employees, and over 161 million customers use the company’s services every month.

The Challenge – A Need for a Common Language
The company was at a crossroads. They had built this walled garden advertising platform but hadn’t yet focused on its future as a truly digital, competitive advertising platform. Within the organization, the product, operational, implementation, and engineering teams were operating in silos— while the engineering teams were working in Jira, the product teams worked in Aha!—and this lack of integration meant there was no holistic view of work rollup to product and priorities.

They were also lacking a common Agile framework, which made it very difficult for employees to extract valuable information. In addition, the teams weren’t able to manage dependencies or coordinate with one another about upcoming product features, which created challenges for bringing those features to market. 



In short, there was very little visibility around the company’s roadmap, at both the product and program management layers. There was also a general need to transition from project to product thinking. They needed something to get everybody on the same page with the same Agile framework—using a common language to talk and deliver across the board. This is why the company was looking for a partner in implementing a common Agile way of working.

The Solution
Seeking a Trusted Partner
One of the company’s executives had previously worked with Cprime. He understood that Cprime could provide valuable expertise during this time of transition to a common Agile framework, which is why the company landed on Cprime as a partner, based on their position in the industry. The fact that Cprime partners with Atlassian on Jira Align and supports the portfolio side of product development, including SAFe® and Agile tools, was also a major vote in Cprime’s favor.“It was the knowledge and trust that Cprime would give us, along with the fit for purpose, advice, and solution experience,” he said.

An Integrated Transformation
The company hired Cprime to find a common Agile framework, decide on the most suitable Agile tool, and foster a product agility mindset. Cprime began by contemplating the best Agile tool. “The company has a huge global footprint. But from a shop size, they are much smaller than what the ‘typical’ Jira Align customer looks like, where there’s usually thousands and thousands of developers,” explained Pearlman. To better understand the company’s Agile requirements and make sure Jira Align was the right tool, Cprime held an on-site workshop with their employees. “We led our Value Drivers Exercise during our implementation kickoff to help everyone understand the value they need to get out of a new Agile framework,” said Pearlman. “This helped us meet the company where they are today, and where they want to be in a year.”

After careful deliberation and consultation with Cprime, the company decided that Jira Align was, indeed, the right tool for the job. A few factors contributed to this decision, including the company’s transition from project to product thinking, the strategic directives employed by the company’s new management team, and the scalable nature of Jira Align.

Cprime then helped the company standardize their Jira and Jira Align operations—moving its teams into new standard templates, integrating the two systems, and leading employee training. Cprime also led training on product agility, product discovery, and scaled agility for their employees. Upon completion, the company had all the puzzle pieces in place to take full advantage of the improved visibility and connectivity offered through Jira, and Jira Align—from their overarching vision and business goals down to individual features and stories.

One member of Cprime’s product agility team hosted ‘office hours’ for the company’s teams, while another coached them through Program Increment (PI) planning. “Then we worked with the company during the PI event itself,” explained Pearlman, “to help make sure that everything was going as smoothly as possible, given that it was a brand new way of working in a brand new tool with brand new configurations.”

The Results
Improved Visibility, Traceability, and Data Extraction
Since working with Cprime to implement Jira Align, SAFe®, and principles of product agility, the company reports that visibility has improved dramatically. Now that the company has a holistic view on what it’s working on, who’s working on what, and what lies ahead on the company’s roadmap, it’s much easier for everyone to prioritize work and understand dependencies. There has been a lot of good feedback from the entire engineering team that they’ve never had visibility like this before in all their years with the company. Having all the relevant data in one system—and being able to extract it in a meaningful way for different stakeholders—has also been very useful and they believe that Cprime has been crucial in this process. Now that everyone’s work is reflected in Jira Align, the company’s employees can freely decompose epics into features, which wouldn’t have been possible in Jira alone. The traceability of Jira Align has been a massive business benefit. For them, working with an external partner to implement these changes was valuable as well. The teams appreciated being able to reach out to an external partner to ask questions.

Moving Forward
By covering system, process, and people/culture, Cprime and the company did everything right. Pearlman also helped the company incorporate their strategic objectives and assign Objectives and Key Results (OKRs) into the system. “It should provide yet another level of granularity and clarity for the engineering teams,” said Pearlman. And while the results of the company’s transformation are still largely subjective, they’re getting more and more objective metrics over time as they get more data and visibility into velocity—what they’re doing, how they plan, how they estimate, how they deliver. All these things are part of their continuous journey going forward.










Case Study #50

Company Details
Industry: Education, Training
Company Size: 350 Employees
Location: Philadelphia, PA
Cprime Services:
Slack Consulting
Toolstack Integration
Executive Summary
Richardson, merged with Sales Performance International (SPI), becoming Richardson Sales Performance. In doing so, they faced the issue of creating a single, collaborative team from the combined 350-person company. With the help of Cprime, more than 95% of Richardson employees became active on Slack in the first week of the rollout.


  
The Overview
Rivals Become Partners
What happens when two companies competing against each other end up in a merger—and on the same team? Richardson, a Philadelphia company helping sales organizations improve results, had to grapple with this challenge when it merged with Charlotte, N.C.-based Sales Performance International (SPI), becoming Richardson Sales Performance.

“We had completely different technology products,” says Justin Walsh, Richardson’s CTO. “We were on Office 365, they were on Google. We were on SharePoint, they were on Box.” The mismatch of technology was fine for the short term, Walsh thought, especially since the two workforces would remain in their respective offices. But there was the issue of creating a single, collaborative team from the combined 350-person company.

“Slack became our glue,” says Walsh of the adoption of the channel-based messaging platform and its ability to help employees work as a team. And with guidance from Slack services partner Cprime, which helps companies successfully integrate Slack, Richardson Sales Performance accelerated its Slack rollout just in time for employees to shift to remote work.



“With Slack we can collaborate and connect much faster than ever before.”
— Justin Walsh, CTO, Richardson Sales Performance

The Solution
One Shot for Selecting the Right Tool
Walsh was immersed in assisting with the upcoming merger. “Implementing new tools wasn’t a priority,” he says. Employees relied on Skype for Business and SharePoint for collaboration, but Walsh thought he could do better for his colleagues.

“Skype was OK for messaging, but that’s only a small part of collaboration,” Walsh says. “Setting up and managing meetings left a lot to be desired. And the collaboration tools for clients and vendors were subpar.”

Walsh chose Slack because it could be implemented quickly, would work well with all the different technologies in use at Richardson and SPI, and would allow employees to collaborate and communicate in one place. He also recognized that he had to choose the right tool the first time—he had new coworkers to sell on the platform.

“You only get one shot at a first impression,” Walsh says. “We wanted the user adoption to be enthusiastic, since our tools can only be as successful as people allow them to be.”

Maximizing Tech Investments with Expert Help
Given that Walsh wanted that first impression of Slack to be the best possible, he enlisted Cprime as his implementation partner. Walsh needed a team that knew the ins and outs of Slack configuration and integrations, as well as best practices to enable employee success on the platform. But there was more to Walsh’s choice of Cprime than the technical side of the Slack rollout: He needed a change management plan from people who knew how to optimize a Slack deployment.

“For many people (who came from) SPI, the launch of Slack was going to be their first impression of my team,” Walsh says. “And we’d already built up a lot of goodwill on the Richardson side of the business. We couldn’t take that for granted.”

Cprime helped Walsh and his team integrate Slack with Okta, Zoom, Google Drive and Box. Such integrations enabled the company to streamline workflows and fully leverage the tools they had invested in. Cprime also created channels, such as #hr for the newly combined company’s HR team, to drive alignment across teams. In addition, Cprime developed a communications plan for the Slack rollout as well as live training sessions and documentation for employees—along with lessons on Slack etiquette, such as when to send a direct message versus post in a channel.



The Results
As Remote Work Takes Hold, an Extra-Fast Rollout
The Slack deployment had originally been scheduled for mid-April 2020, but the early days of the Covid-19 pandemic forced Richardson and SPI employees to work remotely. Within just a few days, Walsh worked closely with Cprime to accelerate the launch of Slack in late March—just about the time when employees would need to stay in touch with one another and get to know their new coworkers.

“It was very fortunate we went down this path with Slack and Cprime,” Walsh says. “Because we’d prepared people for Slack, it wasn’t a huge shock, and they knew how to use it. In fact, they were excited about it.”

Given the tight timeline, Cprime stayed on the project with Walsh and his team to make sure the deployment went smoothly and that integration worked properly. Walsh and Cprime also brainstormed more channels to support the switch to remote work. For instance, there’s a channel that changes themes frequently; one month the theme might be a look at everyone’s home-office setups, another it might be encouraging users to share their favorite travel memories and dreams for future travel.

Swift, Enthusiastic User Adoption
“We didn’t hear a single complaint about learning to use Slack,” Walsh says. “People were motivated to stay in touch with each other more than usual. Our company really came together on Slack.”

“This was the most successful user-adoption project I’ve ever done,” Walsh says of Slack. In the first week of the Slack rollout, more than 95% of employees became active on Slack—and that number hasn’t dropped in more than a year, Walsh says.

In a typical deployment, Walsh might deactivate previous solutions once employees became used to the new tools so that stragglers wouldn’t be tempted to keep using the old solutions. This time, he didn’t have to. “When I looked at the metrics, I could see that usage of Skype for Business had fallen off a cliff,” Walsh says.

More than a year on from the rollout, Slack has changed how Richardson Sales Performance employees communicate and the speed at which work gets done.









Case Study #51

Company Details
Industry: Insurance
Company Size: 30,000 Employees
Location: Global
Products: Agile Team Training & SAFe® Training and Certifications
Cprime Services:
SAFe Consulting
Agile Transformation
Agile Team Training
Executive Summary
This global P&C insurance leader always believed in continuous innovation, but due to the speed of business change, they found their development calendar extending years into the future. Their original process of development was unsustainable. With the help of Cprime consultants and trainers, the organization was able to meet their aggressive transformation goals.


  
Overview
Considering SAFe and Finding Cprime
This organization is a large, publicly-traded Property & Casualty (P&C) and commercial insurance company with operations in the U.S. and more than 50 countries and territories. Of course, being at the top, especially in a highly competitive industry, doesn’t come easy. At that size and scale, aligning people internally to effectively address external issues and changing market forces is a constant need. One of the most common challenges Cprime keeps coming across when working with large and successful companies is the difficulty they have moving fast enough to successfully pivot with the speed of change that defines modern business (and life). In the following case study, we will review the historic situation at this organization and what led to their initial exploration of Agile. We’ll cover why they reached out to Cprime for help and how we worked with them. Finally, we’ll review the phenomenal progress they’ve made and lessons learned along the way.

The Challenge
Over the Waterfall
This organization is a global P&C insurance leader because they have consistently combined a passion for service, deep experience, and exceptional financial strength with their desire to deliver the best possible insurance solutions for individuals, families, and businesses of all sizes. They make it a practice of encouraging their world-class risk experts to share their knowledge, insights, and experience for the benefit of their clients and the industry at large. The company’s core values and mission revolve around protecting the present and building a better future.

To make all of this possible at their current scale and in the existing global insurance environment, this organization must continuously strive to provide custom, high-end solutions for their agents and customers to maintain their competitive edge. And, while relentless improvement is part of their DNA, their solutions development teams had historically utilized a traditional Waterfall methodology. This method involves detailed and insular planning upfront followed by a slowand-steady development pace culminating in a massive release of the planned solution. As a result, they found their development calendar extending to many months, even years, between when a problem or need was identified and when the solution was deployed. In today’s fast-moving consumer environment, that process was becoming unsustainable, and was creating quantifiable business problems.

Of course, resolving the situation was no easy matter either. With over 30,000 employees operating in over 600 offices located in over 50 countries worldwide, any kind of significant organizational change would be both time and resource intensive. But, the desire was there, as was a willingness to do what was necessary to achieve the best eventual outcome. This commitment (even extending to the company’s ongoing technological transformation budget of over $1 billion annually) supported their decision to move forward with a pilot Agile transformation program.

Finding and Pursuing Agility
Paradoxically, although P&C insurance revolves around risk and unexpected events, it has historically been a very stable industry. The increased speed of change, dramatic evolution of customer expectations, and an explosion of new startups that knew how to navigate this new environment led this organization’s leadership to explore Agile. The House of Lean — a foundational component of the Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe®) — appealed to them in light of the paradigm shift the industry was undergoing. The House of Lean promotes a stable process that is reliable, predictable, and quality driven, which resonated with this organization. With these foundations in mind, they settled on a list of strategic and business imperatives:

Strategic Imperatives:
Improve ease of doing business and operation effectiveness through integrated, data- and digitally-driven processes and systems.
Establish a consistent experience for customers, agents, and employees.
Develop and provide dynamic products and services to meet customer segment needs across geographies.
Business Imperatives:
Improve speed to market and ability to respond to evolving customer needs and market changes in all 50 states.
Digitize, enhance, and simplify experiences for both agents and customers and improve data accuracy.
Allow agents, CSRs and business users to work holistically across a whole account.
Develop micro-segmented products to provide appropriate coverage to the customer via a customized quote.
Transform the quote proposal experience with content informed by micro-segmentation models and provide multiple quote options.
Standing in the way, however, were a number of challenges with legacy systems and gaps in their existing technology stack.

Technology Challenges
The existing Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) could not support the development effort: For example, tools such as Docker did not work, there was significant lag, and desktops were unstable and unreliable.
Highly restrictive security was applied to DevOps tooling, and it was housed external to the initiative, which would prevent the team from triaging and troubleshooting. Typically DevOps is more embedded within the organization’s project team, and “support” is less about continuous integration (CI) and continuous deployment (CD) configuration, and more about “is CI/CD online?”
Highly restrictive and varying access to their Cloud would cause similar issues as experienced with access to DevOps Tooling.
The use of an open source version of Kafka without enterprise support led to difficulties with administration and migration to production.
So, moving forward was not a decision the organization took lightly. But, once again, their commitment to improvement prevailed even in the face of these very real practical challenges.

Adopting SAFe® and Bringing in Cprime
Having thoroughly investigated Agile methodologies and settled on SAFe® as the framework that held the most promise for real sustainable change, the organization’s leadership gave the green light to a pilot program in the Personal Insurance (PI) line of business. PI wanted to address legacy technology limitations on their Agent Quote and Issuance System (AQIS), and they would use Agile development to do so.

PRS business and IT executives drafted goals for the initiative which evolved into a prioritized epic list. Prior to the first Program Increment (PI) planning session, recurring meetings were established with the product management (PM) team to decompose and refine the top three epics into a prioritized program backlog of 15 to 20 features. Those recurring PM meetings continue to this day, constantly creating, refining, and prioritizing features in the backlog.

The organization officially adopted SAFe® as their Agile methodology and partnered with Cprime to guide and coach them on their Agile transformation journey. Together, they designed PIs to incorporate five two-week sprints for a 10-week PI. The program participants quickly aligned to SAFe®’s cadence and synchronization approach, finding great value in regularly scheduled team and program-level events. Additionally, an in-person executive workshop led by Cprime trainers resulted in total buy-in at the executive level, a powerful motivator for organizational change.

The First Agile Release Train Pulls Out of the Station
The organization’s first Agile Release Train (ART) launched, adopting Essential SAFe® in the enterprise.

PI worked closely with Dan Teixeira, Northeast Delivery Director & Enterprise Agile Consultant for Cprime as this pilot program officially launched. Together, they took a uniquely aggressive multipronged approach to the initial training required for leadership and the members of the ART. Agreeing that there was a driving need among agents that justified the fastest possible transformation, both groups of stakeholders would be educated concurrently rather than focusing on leadership before moving on to the other teams, as is standard SAFe® practice. To support this effort, Cprime embedded an Agile Transformation Coach within the teams.

The ART consisted of three cross functional feature teams and one component team focused on the legacy system work. One feature team and the component team were co-located in NJ, the remaining teams were distributed across NJ, Mexico, and India.

At the program level, architects provided governance and design for this leading edge technology while executing in the build effort. Realizing that their contribution was not conducive to two week sprints, it was agreed that the architects would work in a Kanban approach based on the program backlog. Knowing what features were on the horizon, they were able to prioritize their own work in advance of the needs of the feature and component teams on the ART.

A year later, the foundations laid with that very first ART are still holding strong as the company continues to scale their use of Agile across teams and departments. But, what went on “behind the scenes” during those early days that truly cemented this success story?

The Solution
The Intersection of Culture and Production
As the leading champion of this entire initiative, the CIO was a driving force behind the pilot program’s success. He recalls,

“I had done a great deal of research into Agile prior to the initiative kickoff. The concepts and processes all seemed quite straight forward, and I was confident that my teams were up to the challenge.” – CIO

Confidence was so high, in fact, he was initially unsure what value an embedded Agile Coach could add. “I was pretty sure there was nothing new this person was going to be able to teach me,” he admits, “but I was wrong.” The PI team knew their stuff. They not only fully embraced the tenets of Agile and SAFe®, but they translated and expanded upon them for the benefit of the larger team. For example, they preached two “mantras” based on the Agile value of individuals and interactions over processes and tools:

Building teams is not equal to hiring talent.
Good leaders make others come alive!
Building off these concepts, they developed a seven step approach that would guide the larger organization, key appointees for Agile roles, and team members alike:

Identify the raw talent in others and help them develop it
Break down barriers of mistrust in the teams and build up the trust within leadership
Draw out the contributions of those less extroverted
Limit the overbearing of the Type A’s
Encourage people to hold themselves accountable to meet commitments
Always demonstrate fairness
Inspire every individual to become their best, by setting the example in myself
Also recognizing that a major goal of Agile and SAFe® is to “shift quality left,” they asked teams to incorporate quality into every step while minimizing risks. They challenged them to automate all testing, and embrace CI/CD from the very start.

Despite the ideal cultural and practical backdrop the PI was building, however, it was in the implementation — where the rubber really meets the road — that any initial doubts about Cprime’s involvement were wholly resolved.

“Changing organizational culture and introducing a new way of doing business is a huge undertaking” – Transformation Leader

“Changing organizational culture and introducing a new way of doing business is a huge undertaking,” one stakeholder recalls, “and the task could have quickly become overwhelming. Progress could have ground to a halt. With the help of Cprime’s insight and direction, however, I was able to flesh out my own vision for the initiative and effectively implement SAFe® quickly across diverse and remotely located teams.”

He concludes, “we never would have met our aggressive transformation goals without Cprime.”

What Cprime Provided
Over the course of a 10-month engagement, the Agile transformation experts at Cprime offered all of the following:

SAFe® certification trainings
Cprime proprietary workshops
In-person executive training
Team and program event coaching
Individual one-on-one guidance
Having these services customized to the organization’s unique circumstances and needs made them more effective and more enjoyable for everyone involved. Combined with the teams’ tremendous desire to learn and succeed, they quickly moved from a Waterfall mindset to “doing” Agile and “living SAFe®.”

The Results
So, where is the organization now along their Agile transformation journey? The CIO shared the following updates:

We are maintaining alignment to the strategic vision by driving continuous refinement and prioritization of the program and team backlogs based on agent and customer feedback, revised business outlook, and strategic imperatives.
We are continuously delivering using the SAFe® framework, with new features and fixes released regularly on an optimized ART cadence.
Business and IT are working effectively together to deliver work iteratively each sprint.
Early learnings through demos and established feedback loops provide insights from agents and customers regarding user experience expectations. This has helped to drive focus on real end-user needs, rather than the business-defined expectations our former Waterfall methodology relied on.
He has seen a number of positive impacts on his teams as well:

“As a CIO, I see that the entire team is super-engaged in the project at all times, so they’re more productive. For example, under the previous Waterfall process, BAs used to be very busy during requirements gathering while developers were an audience. Then, developers were very busy during coding and BAs were in support mode. Now, the entire team is fully engaged throughout the project. This is a game changer.

“There’s also more opportunity to help each other and teamwork has improved as a result. On projects where we have multiple teams working concurrently, we’ve often seen sprints where one team is struggling to finish their user stories and the other team is ahead. Since team members are cross-functional, the team that’s struggling can ask for help and members from the other team jump in. The Release Train Engineer can rearrange teams proactively as well to help avoid this situation when it is foreseeable. In the end, everyone is engaged and highly productive.”

He also relates a powerful example of the impact his team’s Agile transformation has had on the organization as a whole:

“During one project, we hired a design company to assist us with user experience (UX) design and workflows. Prototypes were developed and the team started implementing them. We then conducted a demo for our senior executives after two sprints of work. The UX and prototypes did not meet the senior executives’ expectations and we ended up needing to create totally new prototypes. On one hand, this taught us a powerful lesson regarding the need for alignment of
expectations between middle management and senior executives. However, the biggest save was that this was caught in the second sprint. If this had been a Waterfall project, we wouldn’t have developed the UX until 6 months down the road, and this would have cost the company millions of dollars, not to mention major project delays, impacting speed to market.”

Thus far, the Agile transformation at this organization has been a resounding success. Of course, an Agile transformation is a journey, not a destination. So, the journey continues. But, there’s no doubt that going Agile has set up this current global leader in P&C insurance to retain that position for many years to come.









Case Study #52

Company Details
Industry: Energy
Company Size: Over 40,000 employees
Cprime Services:
Agile Solutions
Lean Portfolio Management Solutions
SAFe for Teams
Executive Summary
This energy industry leader was looking for assistance successfully adopting Scaled Agile and Lean Portfolio management practices. They faced challenges ranging from size to economic pressure along their continued six year journey to agile adoption. With the help of Cprime consultants and trainers, the company saves tremendous amounts of time and money as they fully embrace Agile principles.


  
Overview – Bringing A 100 Year Old Oil Company Up to Speed With Agile
With a rich history going back well over a century, this international oil company employs over 40,000 people worldwide and operates thousands of upstream and downstream operations across the petroleum supply chain. For many reasons, change has wracked the petroleum industry over the past several decades. This company has certainly not been immune to the effects of fluctuating oil prices, rapid technological and environmental changes, and most recently, the pandemic and its various impacts worldwide. However, relying on a long history of innovation and resilience, they set out in 2015 to improve internal processes to create efficiencies and reallocate necessary resources. They’re still on that journey today, and Cprime has been there every step of the way.

The Challenges
Over the nearly six years we’ve been working with this organization, they’ve faced many challenges. In roughly chronological order, here are some of the biggest challenges we helped them address.

Sheer Size
As a large, international corporation, the company had grown organically for decades. A long string of mergers and acquisitions combined with rapid changes in industry circumstances created a widespread development organization across several continents and time zones that were split up into dozens of business units, each serving as its own silo. Bureaucracy and red tape were thick and stubborn, and the company would have to overcome a lot of inertia to unite their teams and fully embrace agility.

Economic Pressure
Between a recession and its long, slow recovery, the company had experienced a tremendous loss in gross profit. Workforce reductions and countless other adjustments were necessary during this period. And, while the desire to eventually save time and money through efficiency was a significant driver behind the transformation they sought, it also served as a looming challenge that internal champions of change continually faced: were the potential future gains worth the current cost in terms of time and money?

Oil & Gas Field Turnarounds


A factor that’s unique to the oil and gas industry is what’s called, “turnarounds.” This refers to the scheduled shutdown of a facility for scheduled maintenance, inspections, and upgrades. It usually occurs every few years and lasts several weeks. During the turnaround period, they pump and refine no oil. And, the cost of replacing or upgrading all that equipment is high. So, they measure the direct and indirect cost of a turnaround in the hundreds of millions of dollars for the largest facilities. The company wanted to apply Agile practices to their turnaround process to streamline and boost quality, therefore
saving time and money every time.

Price of a Barrel of Oil
Another factor unique to the oil and gas industry is that the most critical factor in their overall revenue and profit is largely out of their control: the per-barrel price of crude oil. Where other sectors need to consider “concept to cash,” oil companies are more concerned with “wells to wheels” — how to get the oil out of the ground, refined, transported, and sold to consumers, all at a price that’s controlled mainly by outside influences. Once again, the company knew that efficiency and streamlined operations were vital to overcoming this challenge.

The Solution
We have worked with this client for nearly six years thus far, so the solution has evolved and expanded along the way. This collaborative approach encompasses many individuals, all of whom are on board and benefiting from the transformation efforts. Each of the 13 platforms includes between 100 and 400 people. Today, 30 Cprime coaches are embedded within each of these 13 platforms to continue aiding the evolution of their Agile practice along each value stream. At one point, we had 40 coaches and ten scrum masters working with this client simultaneously worldwide.

Training
This company approached Cprime back in 2015, initially requesting an Introduction to Agile training class for about 250 members of the Project Management Organization (PMO). Around the same time, one stakeholder began work on a project to move the organization from physical to virtual servers in the cloud. They decided to start applying what they learned in this introductory class almost immediately on that server project.

As our relationship with the client has evolved, we’ve provided many additional training classes, some customized to the client. But, much of the training occurring these days is handled by internal coaches and trainers we have enabled, making the continued scaling of this practice more sustainable over the long term for the organization.

Scaling
It’s common for Agile success to begin with one or two teams and spread outward as more teams adopt the practice while seeing their peers’ success. The same occurred in this organization, but much faster than usual. Not long after completing that initial class, they saw the need for a formal scaling framework that would support the expansion that was already happening across teams and upwards into the organization. They reached out to Cprime again for guidance on choosing the proper framework and, after much discussion, settled on the Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe®), which we helped them implement.

Coaching
As the organization began scaling the Agile practice, they saw the need for ongoing assistance at the team and program level, so they invited Cprime coaches to come in and assist. Within a short time, we had coaches helping teams learn and apply what they were learning at the scale of twenty teams-of-teams. Over time, the coaching piece has proved the longest-standing aspect of our work with this client.

Tech and Business Transformation
One of the significant changes they had to make — starting before our initial engagement but continuing with our input where needed — was a combined technological and operational transformation to eliminate the silos formed by countless business units.

Lean Portfolio Management (LPM)
Most recently, as the Agile practice has continued to scale, it’s become apparent there are bottlenecks at the portfolio level that are hindering the company’s progress toward its agility goals. So, we’ve begun helping them implement LPM as part of their scaled Agile practice. This is an ongoing process, but even initial results are impressive.

The Results – Team Collaboration & Efficiency Improvements
Today, business leaders and IT leaders work collaboratively within these platforms down to business product owners — which are process owners within their business domain. And, it’s working. The company saves tremendous amounts of time and money as they fully embrace Agile principles as part of their new approach to the work. We’ve heard many versions of the same basic feedback from people at all levels of the organization: “I’m never going back to the way we did this before.” And, perhaps the greatest testament to the success we’ve seen with this client is the fact that we’ve worked with them continually for nearly six years now. Through all this internal change, all the external ebb and flow of the oil and gas industry, and through the upheavals caused by a global pandemic, they still rely on Cprime to help make their organization leaner, faster, and stronger. If you’d like to see similar results, contact Cprime today.











Case Study #53

Company Details
Industry: Fintech
Company Size: 36,000
Location: Atlanta, GA
Products: Scaled Agility Consulting, Jira Align, Jira Software & Confluence
Cprime Services:
SAFe in Jira
Jira Align Consulting
Jira Software
Confluence
Executive Summary
NCR, a banking and commerce solutions leader, was looking for help scaling their agile practices. Atlassian called on Cprime to assist them with moving from spreadsheets into one integrated Atlassian solution, including Jira, Confluence, and Jira Align.


  
The Overview
As 135-year-old NCR, a leader in banking and commerce solutions scaled their agile practices across their entire portfolio of products to fuel payment innovations and accelerate delivery, they realized their toolset wasn’t fully supporting their goals. By shifting from static spreadsheets and tools to one integrated Atlassian solution, with help from Platinum Solution Partner Cprime, this global company is delivering more innovations and better service faster than ever before, cementing their role as a fintech leader and paving the way for their next century in business.



The Challenge
Moving From Waterfall to Agile with Atlassian
As technology has changed the way consumers buy and companies sell in nearly every industry, some sectors have found it easier than others to remain competitive. Those who struggle the most tend to be mature industries that have historically relied on manual operations and personal service, such as banking, hospitality, and retail – precisely the industries NCR serves. As the #1 global point-of-sale (POS) software provider for retail and hospitality and the #1 provider of multi-vendor ATM software, NCR is not only helping their clients bridge their digital and physical operations, but also doing the same for themselves with the support of agile and Atlassian. After over a century in business, NCR’s leadership team made the bold decision to pursue a digital transformation to ensure that the established company could continue to innovate, compete, and keep clients happy. This transition included modernizing not only their technology but also their processes.

In iterative stages, NCR’s engineering teams shifted from waterfall to agile, and from static spreadsheets and tools to an integrated Atlassian solution, enabling them to deliver more innovation, faster than ever before. From evolving their hardware-centric business to a software and services company; to developing a self-checkout payment solution for one of the largest retailers within days; to rapidly creating contactless payment technologies when the coronavirus hit; NCR has leveraged their new processes and platforms to cement their spot as a fintech leader and pave the way for their next century in business.

Necessity is the Mother of Invention
When you’ve been in business long enough, you get used to adapting to change and uncertainty. Whenever NCR has faced a major challenge that would knock most companies down, they’ve instead evolved and come back stronger, better serving their customers and their employees – the drivers of their innovation. As NCR adopted agile to fuel their innovation and accelerate delivery, the engineering team established consistent practices, such as working in quarterly program increments, and ceremonies, such as sprint planning, standups, and sprint reviews with demos.



During this process, they realized their toolset wasn’t fully supporting their efforts and goals. “We’re always trying to deliver fast, innovate fast, and create awesome customer experiences. It often comes down to people, processes, and tooling,” says Arthur Meloy, VP of Innovation and Development Transformation. “We have thousands of highly motivated engineers with modern skills, but they were mostly relying on spreadsheets and Smartsheets to keep up with tasks. We wanted to take all that grunt work out of it so the teams could really focus on producing value for our clients.”

The Solution
One Solution Speaking Everyone’s Language
When NCR began their scaled agile transformation, engineering was using Confluence to store knowledge, Jira Software to track tasks and issues, and spreadsheets to roll up their data into a master view for product owners and leadership. NCR was the first enterprise business to use Jira Align (formerly AgileCraft) when they adopted it to support their Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe) transformation, but it wasn’t until two years later that they fully embraced it with training and support from Solution Partner Cprime. “We were using Jira Software to do agile planning and operate day to day as an engineering team, but we needed a better way to bubble up big projects to a higher level and coordinate between projects with different timing, dependencies, and change management,” Arthur says. “We started to adopt Jira Align to glue it all together so we could see one view of all the solutions and dependencies, and the cascading effect of each change. That helps us make informed decisions, like whether we want to re-allocate people to meet a date or let it slip while knowing the implications.”

Since going all-in on Jira Align, NCR has used it in tandem with Jira Software and Confluence to keep all stakeholders in lockstep throughout strategic planning and daily execution. As NCR’s product team receives market and customer feedback that informs fixes, improvements, and new solutions, product managers and product owners use Jira Align to create requirements for program increments, then break them down into epics and stories. That information automatically cascades to Jira Software, where engineers plan and execute sprints, using Confluence along the way to create documentation and collaborate. Slack notifications are triggered anytime something changes in Jira Software, so all users can maintain passive awareness and visibility into changes that may have downstream effects.

Since all of the solutions are integrated with each other, each stakeholder can access the information they need, from the tool of their choice, in a way that makes sense to them. Engineers spend the majority of their time in Jira Software, which transfers data from their tasks and tickets into GitHub for seamless deployment, as well as back to Jira Align for planning and coordination. Product owners rely on that data to manage their programs and portfolios. Engineering managers use filters to track capacity and delivery timelines for their line of business and prioritize what their team will work on next. As these leaders report back to executives, they use Jira Align “walls of work” to show high-level roadmaps, quickly evaluate progress, and make informed decisions. “Jira and Jira Align really complement each other,” Arthur says.



“Our engineering team lives and breathes in Jira every second of the day, but it’s almost like Kryptonite to our product owners. They really value getting business requirements. from it, but Jira Align has been a bridge that provides a view they can relate to. Similarly, when you’re presenting to executives or doing quarterly business reviews with managers, you’re not going to go into Jira. The walls of work within Jira Align depict roadmaps and boards in a way they understand and can quickly see how our teams are delivering on their commitments.” As engineers iterate and priorities shift, Atlassian helps the team adapt while minimizing risk. Arthur explains, “In our world of spreadsheets, it was a real pain to make changes. With Jira Align, everything is front and center. There’s always something new that comes into sprints. With Jira Align, we can see our capacity and have a conversation about whether we’re going make a sacrifice to accommodate the new priority.”

The Results
Simple, Made Possible – and Measurable
While NCR has boasted a world-class engineering team for decades, the company now has the modern processes and platforms needed to continue delivering world-class payment solutions for decades to come. Using agile principles to guide their work and Atlassian to plan and execute, the team says they’re not only able to better prioritize the customer experience, but also measure how well they’re doing. “To provide great service, we need to be able to manage and measure our external backlog of defects, arrival rates, internal defect backlogs, and our responsiveness and resolution times for our clients. And from a delivery perspective, we have a ‘Say/Do’ ratio: Did we deliver on schedule? With quality? On budget? Using Jira and Jira Align, we can track all of that and make sure we’re hitting the mark on every dimension.” Free from the waterfall processes, spreadsheets, and disconnected systems that were holding them back, NCR has increased its NPS and accelerated delivery of new capabilities and fixes from every few months to every single day.



Now that they’re empowering their people even more, they feel more equipped than ever to deliver on the promise they make to their customers: “Simple, made possible.” “Atlassian helps with organization, speed, and transparency,” Arthur says. “When you have engineers and lines of business across the world, it’s a real beast to organize our work. Having one system of record that works across all of those is invaluable. Without that, you don’t have the speed to deliver. You also need transparency as to what’s being delivered and changed so the business can course correct. Atlassian has delivered a tremendous amount of value for us, and that trickles down to our customers.”











Case Study #54


Company Details
Industry: Healthcare
Company Size: 8,400 Employees
Location: Illinois, US
Cprime Services:
Business Analysis Training
Executive Summary
Allscripts' Business Analysis had all the right tools and processes but they were not aligned to the each other resulting in product delays and communication challenges. With the help of Cprime trainers, they were able to achieve alignment and success.


  
The original Allscripts situation confronted two key strategic problems most enterprises face: First, software development challenges, which come in many forms. Allscripts had very smart project teams, but much of their methodology wasn’t consistent. They had numerous process and model challenges. There were communication inefficiencies, both with offshore departments and internally. There were time lags that resulted from these issues and a number of others.

Second, Allscripts faced job role challenges. Again, despite having the human capability and a wealth of project assets available across the enterprise, the processes were not always in alignment. The many departments and roles weren’t always speaking the same language, or using the same methods.

Allscripts knew they needed to improve their business analysis practice, but even pinpointing the specific needs proved challenging. We provided experienced experts who could walk through an organizational analysis, and help determine how to most efficiently deliver the skills and process improvement that were necessary for their BA teams to begin operating as a world-class software product development operation.

They are a wonderful example of how the internal workings of an enterprise can be oiled and improved by SDLC training. The real beauty of enterprise training is the overall competitive advantage that opens up when you solve SDLC challenges. When projects get done faster, with fewer errors and more usability, it does more than just move the needle. The real win comes from the possibilities. Sure, you’re paying to solve an immediate need – skills gaps. But, as Allscripts demonstrates, the true business value of trained project teams is human capital that is more engaged, more successful, more creative, and more motivated. They can succeed at their jobs: not only the key to the enterprise’s success, but also the most important factor in their job satisfaction and career path. Along the way, the business will discover new product possibilities, new operational efficiencies, and tap into new deposits of enterprise value.

Allscripts BA Academy: A Leadership Perspective
Debbie Stolper is a Senior Manager for the UX team on Allscripts’ HomeCare Solutions. We talked with her about the value of business analysis program training from a team leader’s point of view.

Debbie has been at Allscripts for almost five years. As a leader of the Homecare Development team, her group designs products for Allscripts’ industry-leading home care systems. This product line is designed to improve clinical quality of care, financial performance, and operational control for both large, integrated home care organizations and small home care companies alike. The team’s products provide business, clinical, and scheduling functionality for multiple lines of business—home health, hospice, and private duty are combined seamlessly in one integrated home care software system. Other priorities include interoperability, exchanging real-time data with state HIEs, and meeting health information exchange industry standards.

Team leaders and the value of training
Debbie has been very pleased with Allscripts’ commitment to training, and she told us a little about her experience with the Allscripts “BA Academy” and how it worked for her team.

She leads 8 business analysts and technical writers — their job is designing user experience for a range of home care product customers. When she first began, she thought she was being brought on board to manage “product designers.” While they do design products, she soon found that she actually led a team of business analysts. At this time, Allscripts was in the process of piloting a BA training program. During the pilot, a small number of team members from across the organization are invited to participate, and the enterprise “tries out” the training to see if it’s a good fit and will add value to the enterprise.

Debbie approved one of her team members to attend the pilot, and she returned from the training with a great deal of positive feedback. She emphasized how relevant the training experience was to her own job, and how it would apply to her daily work. By this time other areas of Allscripts’ BA workforce were experiencing the same positive feedback from the pilot program, and the enterprise began organizing their BA teams into cohorts who could move through the training program according to the schedule and curriculum plans organized by Cprime Learning and Allscripts. Debbie approved training for some of the other members of her team, and they also came back with great feedback.

Debbie and fellow team leaders began the process of training entire project teams. One of the things she liked most about the experience was the fact that the training was not just a one-time class held at a public location. The training was designed for Allscripts and delivered at Allscripts. It was a series of classes over a period of time that allowed colleagues who held similar roles at the company but didn’t know each other to go through training together. They came out speaking a common language, solving the same kinds of problems, and leveraging common skill sets learned in class.

Debbie eventually attended the training herself. Allscripts is an Agile shop, and one of her primary concerns was making sure the training and skills that BAs learned were compatible with the Agile framework they used to develop software products. She was pleased to find that they were – business analysis tools like estimation and prioritization weren’t only compatible with Agile…they strengthened and reinforced the Agile development environment in which they worked.

When Debbie evaluates her teams, she looks at results. Although she readily agreed that metrics and data are important, she said that the true value of good BA skills is obvious in the daily work. The training gave her team specific tools for correctly prioritizing tasks and analyzing needs. She stresses that ultimately these translate into measurable long-term results, but in many ways it’s the short term reward of seeing an instant boost in competency and productivity that is most exciting to the manager of a team.

How BA training improves daily work
In terms of daily work, Debbie’s team focuses on product deliverables. The Homecare team develops software and tools that will be used by home care and home health agencies. These users include financial customers, clinical customers (ie PTs, OTs) and network administrators. With such a range of end users, there are many examples of critical daily work activities that were addressed by the training. These tasks combine to define the success of the overall product line. For instance, the home care development team performs research and works with a solutions manager to define needs for the product line. They spend time decomposing and analyzing specific product needs within the department, but they also work closely with customers to make sure the final product dovetails with the practical requirements of the end users. From there, they have a release schedule they follow, and they generate user stories to clarify both project requirements and the daily workflow.

Because the people on Debbie’s team have to work together to deliver one common product, it is critical that they have a shared experience and a shared language they can use to perform their daily work and talk about what they are doing. One of the key benefits of the training experience is this common playbook. Debbie’s team members continue to train with us. She believes their skill set as a whole is enhanced and strengthened. With every training session, this “unification” grows stronger, allowing the team to function as an increasingly tight, synchronized unit. This has allowed speed to market and defect rate to be dramatically improved.

There were some very specific tools within the Home Care product line that Debbie says benefited her team right away:

Knowing how to ask the correct questions
Learning how to elicit information from stakeholders indirectly
Leaving with a common “language” and a unified playbook for business analysis techniques across the enterprise – even across departments that were previously siloed
Knowing how to confront and analyze tough factors that influence decisions
Mingling with other business analysts in the company, allowing faster communication, higher levels of trust, and much more efficient activities even across departments that didn’t previously work together.
Debbie’s team works very closely with the technical teams that develop Allscripts’ Homecare products. The ability to improve their skill set as BAs has allowed them to better provide appropriate information for both software developers and the QA teams.

Parting advice for companies who need training
We asked Debbie what advice she would give to an organization who are seeking business analyst training or who are struggling with their BA practice. Her top recommendations were to carefully review course outlines and take a good look at the CVs of instructors. Because the human expert standing in front of the class is ultimately the vehicle for learning new expertise, it’s the subject matter expert who is the most critical link in the training experience. And when that experience and expertise gets transferred to a working team, the building blocks of the enterprise as a whole are solid.

Allscripts BA Academy: A Clinical Perspective
Donna Hayes is a Clinical Business Analyst with Allscripts. She brings a healthcare background and clinical experience to the software development processes at Allscripts, but she was new to business analysis. She spoke with us about the importance of the training program to a new BA.

Donna’s background is in nursing and clinical work. She was hired by Allscripts to provide subject matter expertise as a business analyst for software products that would ultimately be purchased and used by healthcare professionals. By onboarding specialized BA staff members such as Donna, Allscripts can truly identify and respond to the unique needs of their healthcare client base. She brings a vital clinical component to Allscripts’ product design process.

Business Analysis at Allscripts: The Clinical Component
As she helps design how products work for the clinical user, she also has a responsibility to patient safety in feature design and product release. She writes user stories and runs sprints for the implementation teams on the back end of the Allscripts delivery process. The marriage of Donna’s healthcare background with a software development environment is the type of combination that allows Allscripts to market products in the mission-critical and highly technical world of healthcare.

However, although her clinical background was invaluable, when she first started she was completely new to the world of business analysis as a profession. She was a perfect candidate to attend the Allscripts BA Academy.

According to Donna, attending the classes allowed her to understand the language of business analysis from the perspective of a BA professional, rather than strictly as a nurse or a clinical practitioner. She describes how helpful it was to simply learn the vocabulary and processes of a business analyst. The technical language of her healthcare background differed completely from the standardized language of a BA working on a software team. Attending a structured series of BA classes quickly allowed her to get up to speed on the language of a BA, and therefore become a “translator” between clinical needs and software feature design

The Training Experience
Donna describes the training courses as “information intensive.” The program required effort and a certain time commitment, but Allscripts’ dedication to developing employee skills and the leap in her capability made it worth it. She can now keep new development measurable and testable, with standardized processes and expectations. She learned to model present state and future state, and how to specifically define the “how and why” of feature design and deliverables.

Despite the challenge, Donna said the training experience was fun. She was impressed with the way the classes worked as a series, building a complete professional skill set which all tied together at the end of the training program.

We asked Donna to name some specific responsibilities the courses helped bring method to on a daily basis. Her key picks revolved around communication and stakeholder identification. Specifically, she told us she gained great deal of value from:

Learning to correctly identify key stakeholders
Writing appropriate goals for end usersIsolating specifics of system behavior
Eliciting detailed, well-defined requirements
Using tangible methods for connecting feature design, code building, and QA
As Donna became better versed in business analysis tools and techniques, she began to identify parallels between her clinical background and the BA profession. For instance, healthcare practitioners know that workflow is a critical issue. A veteran business analyst will say the same thing. Teams have to keep things moving appropriately, and their final products have to function in a way that allows efficient, correct workflow in the end use environment as well.

As simple as an insight like this may seem, it demonstrates perfectly how valuable the training experience is for a BA like Donna who performs business analysis work in a sophisticated field. Learning standardized techniques for connecting dots, from laying the groundwork for a project with regulatory research and stakeholder identification, to executing in a way that seamlessly ports design over to the software development and QA team, is the heart of a BA training program. Donna used the example of redesigning a prescription process. Where does the physician enter the process? Where does the patient enter the process? Where does product enter the process? An expert set of BA tools allows a solution to be accurately mapped.

Tying it All Together
Donna left us with one final valuable observation. As new as she was to the BA role when she began training, she described how there were seasoned business analysts working in the field for 15 or 20 years who took away just as much value from the training as she did. Despite smart teams and a wealth of experience, Allscripts had a variety of procedures and vocabularies being used. It was the teaching of a uniform, consistent, and fully updated BA body of knowledge that synchronized teams across the enterprise and dramatically improved the quality and time to market of the Allscripts’ products built by Donna and her teams. This is the experience of a huge percentage of the BA teams. The technology is there, and so are the processes. It’s getting your people in step with them and with each other that unlocks both daily and strategic advantage.

Allscripts BA Academy: A Cross-Functional BA Perspective
Jose Biggiotorres is an expert Business Analyst working on multiple initiatives at Allscripts. He lends his expertise to different departments, and specializes in financial issues. We spoke to him about the importance of well-trained business analysts in an enterprise environment.

When we spoke with Jose, he was just finishing up tenure as an expert BA in charge of the financial side of Allscripts’ Homecare solutions product line. He dealt with the accounting side of analysis on products, as well as many aspects of statistical analysis and data. He was preparing to transition to a product line at Allscripts dealing exclusively with finance and accounting-related healthcare products.

Overcoming Professional and Enterprise Obstacles
Despite being a business analyst for many years, Jose had never received formal BA training. In fact, like many of the business analysts, it was only recently that they even began calling their work “business analysis.” They had been called product developers, or data analysts, or user experience designers. Of course, all these roles are encompassed by the BA profession, and they all have a common body of knowledge to draw from in performing the wider role of a BA.

One of the major obstacles Jose faced on a daily basis was the fact that the offshore software engineers he worked with simply did not understand the healthcare landscape in the United States. Therefore, they could not really visualize the end user of Allscripts’ products. The BA training gave Jose hard techniques for developing end user personas and ways to communicate holistic user needs that could transcend even the cultural and distance barriers of his different business units.

Jose described another pain point encountered by his teams on a past project before the BA Academy: the need to chart additional business processes and documentation toward the end of projects. This need added dramatically to the communication burden of the teams, just when they needed to be able to focus on really pushing toward the conclusion of the project. Jose told us he learned a variety of tools and techniques during the BA Academy that would have allowed them to take care of much of this closer to the beginning, which would have yielded obvious quality and delivery speed advantages.

Process Skills and People Skills
Even though improvements in these results can be quantified – i.e. time reduced to delivery, defect rate reductions, or revenue increases tied to a product line – Jose told us that many of the tools used to achieve them have more to do with people than numbers. There are certainly a host of business analysis tools that are very analytical…charts, decomposition techniques, modeling, etc. But of equal importance are the tools that help integrate the members of a team with the processes used to build the project – like building the personas Jose described. If Allscripts can appropriately understand their users, they can understand their customers. However, those insights don’t get carried over to the software development teams without proper business analysis methods. The training gave Jose and his team tools for connecting factors like end user demographics and technology skill level to the developers working with the code. As with many of the BAs we speak to, user story techniques played a critical role. Furthermore, simply having uniform methods for defining those user stories, for diagramming and modeling both personas and processes, can be transformative. Jose told us that beginning to use these tools has made a big difference to everyone on the team understanding their jobs – not just as individuals, but as a unified team.

The “Virtual Training” Experience for Remote Teams
Jose was an important training customer because he was part of a group that attended the “virtual” classes. At the time of his training, he worked in the Ukraine, where Allscripts had a number of development teams. As part of the enterprise training solution we delivered, it was important to train both the remote BA staff as well as the in-person classroom training delivered at Allscripts headquarters.

Just as many customers are, Jose was skeptical at first about attending training in a virtual environment which relies so heavily upon peer interaction and group exercises. But he told us that by the end of his first class, he was a believer. He told us that the customized Webex classroom environment did not hamper his ability to get to know colleagues, to exchange ideas and practices, and to collaborate on group work as they got to know each other. He interacted and formed relationships with Allscripts colleagues he had never met. In Jose’s words, “You would think you want to do this type of training in person. But the way it was handled and presented, it was as if we were in the same room. The experience was fantastic.” In fact, despite beginning as a skeptic, Jose was very specific about that fact that he would like his future training to be virtual as well.

Strategic Benefit and Proficient Enterprise BA Teams
The last point Jose left us with was less about any specific expertise taught in class, and more about the strategic value of this type of training to the enterprise. Training like this is not necessarily cheap, but his perspective echoed several of his colleagues:

“You need to invest in your human assets and have them grow in order to achieve your business goals. How many times have we heard that [a product team] was not able to finish by the date that we wanted to announce, so we’re going to have to extend it?

Well, the BAs are doing a good job. The project starts with the BA work. But if we do not have the tools to be able to achieve that design in a timely fashion and in a way that everybody will understand, then the business goal is not going to be achieved. So, you may have a group of BAs that are doing a fantastic job, but are they doing it to the level that the business needs? The investment in time and money to be able to bring that group of BAs to that next level is
the best investment a company can make to ensure the company’s goals are met. If you do not, sales might not be as high. Client satisfaction may not be as good.”

It would be difficult to sum it up much better. In Jose’s case, he is an expert business analyst traveling across project environments and locations. His job role contributes to multiple product lines according to need. Those contributions are closely tied to product success and profitability.

Allscripts BA Academy: Daily Business Analysis
Ken Burney is a Senior Business Analyst for Allscripts’ EHR Solutions product line. He spoke with us about the value of the training program as someone who has to deliver functional, marketable software on a regular basis.

Ken has been with Allscripts for 6 years as a business analyst, and was recently promoted to Senior BA after attending the Allscripts BA Academy. He performs business analysis for Allscripts’ Electronic Healthcare Record (EHR) product line – specifically systems dealing with immunization registries, patient portals, and Syndromic Surveillance (SS). The major focus of their current release is on meaningful use, compliance, and ensuring value and compliance for the customers of Allscripts. Rapidly changing government regulations and technology shifts have given rise to a host of challenges for their clients. Allscripts has to make sure these challenges are addressed in their products. If not, unsatisfied clients are just the beginning: clients may inadvertently break the law, or be ineligible for payment by the government for their work. It’s a significant area of need for their customers, and Ken is on the front line of providing solutions.

The BA’s job at Allscripts: Building Healthcare Solutions
He spends a lot of time researching government regulations and requirements around healthcare. He spends time with clients, hearing about their ideas and needs, and figuring out what is necessary, what’s necessary to meet government requirements, and what are meaningful use features.

Ken gave a few specific examples of skills he learned during the classes that he uses on a daily basis: he has gotten much better at user stories since training. There were a lot of things that seemed simple on the surface, but they really do make a big difference to the end result in terms of clarifying requirements and expectations. The training also taught him techniques to ask better questions. He keeps a quick reference guide at his desk to keep him from slipping back into less effective methods of requirements elicitation, and every time he begins to write, he makes sure his questions meet the standards taught in class. This improvement has allowed a deeper dive into client needs, brought more clarity to what clients REALLY need by focusing on finding the root issues during the client conversation. No matter how eloquently customers frame their answers, ferreting out the real needs can be a challenge. Therefore, on a daily basis, Ken’s most valuable takeaways from training were the questioning techniques. Different ways to ask questions and consistent writing techniques when formulating questions are examples of skills Ken now uses every day.

The BA as Communicator
A lot of the BA’s job revolves around communication. We asked Ken to provide specific examples of communication challenges the Allscripts teams faced when working with technical teams. He explained that the BA is a liaison between the business customers and the technical resources behind the product (developers, testers, offshore resources etc.) They often faced situations in which terminology or industry jargon meant one thing to the customer, but something else entirely to the technical team. So even in cases when the same language was being used, expectations were not met because perceived meanings of the language were different. There were many examples of situations in which the development team spent time building products that fit their understanding of requirements as defined, but the customer was expecting something completely different. Learning correct BA questioning techniques, consistent language and processes, and tools for identifying the real needs behind the language of others have been valuable aids in his job.

Ken had taken some business training in the past, but the key difference was that his company sent him to public classes where he received instruction with a lot of strangers. Having the training brought to Allscripts, delivered to all their own teams, lent an “institutional equity” to the experience that has been very valuable.

Although Ken is a practicing BA on an Allscripts team and mostly uses daily techniques he learned in class, he also has something to say about BA training from the company’s leadership perspective. “If your BAs are very efficient, you’re going to spend a lot less time and money developing your product. You’ll develop it more efficiently, more accurately, and sometimes as a more useful product. And, you can get it to market fairly quickly. I would think that this training would improve the quality of work, speed to market, and hopefully more market share and ultimately more money.”

The Training Experience
Ken has not yet pursued a BA certification, but he’s beginning to consider it. Besides the confidence and career benefit of holding a credential, he discussed the fact that certification for the BA is sometimes of greatest value to the leadership, because managers and leaders higher in the company may not understand the granular work performed by BA teams below them, but if those teams hold industry-standard credentials it provides assurance and confidence in the capabilities of their staff.

Ken enjoyed the training he took. He had three different instructors throughout the program. He told us the experience was engaging, and the instructors always seemed to have a lot of real-world experience on the topics they addressed. He was one of the first BAs to take the classes, and immediately after he took the training, he felt the experience would be valuable both for other BAs at Allscripts, as well as for the organization as a whole. The prospect of a thoroughly trained staff of BAs seemed obvious – whether soliciting requirements, improving communication, or simply getting on the same page with terminology and BA techniques within the company.

As other BA teams in the company continued to get trained, Ken was preparing for his upcoming software release. Two weeks after we interviewed Ken, his teams were going into code freeze and preparing to finalize the project. There were a lot of new features included, and a lot of complexity to manage. Fortunately, Ken and his colleagues were…and are…well-equipped to bring the final product to market.










Case Study #55

Company Details
Industry: Transportation
Company Size: 100 Employees
Location: GA, US
Products: Consulting and Training
Cprime Services:
Custom Training
Executive Summary
Georgia State Road and Tollway Authority (SRTA) experienced challenges making real time decision. Project information was shared through weekly updates and progress reports rather than a universal project management tool across teams.


  
The Challenge
Like many organizations, the Georgia State Road and Tollway Authority (SRTA) was running into issues because they were not using a universal project management tool across teams, leaving project managers without guidance as to what processes or tools to use. With no set policy, project managers relied on Excel spreadsheets and emails to present data, prioritize their workload, and communicate across teams. Information from project management teams was presented through status reports and weekly updates, making it difficult to make real-time decisions. This created disorganization not only within individual teams, but across the organization as well.

When Project Management Office Director Carlos Trias started in 2018, he quickly saw issues with siloed teams, and realized the need to find a solution that would work for everyone. While most options were quite expensive, the Georgia SRTA was already paying for Office 365 Online. He decided to look further into SharePoint to see if it was the answer to their problems. However, like many companies who try to use SharePoint, he quickly realized that many users within the organization did not understand how SharePoint worked, and ran into roadblocks when trying to create the solution internally. Ultimately, Carlos realized the best solution was to reach out to someone from an outside organization to help implement their SharePoint deployment.

The Solution
After participating in a custom five-day SharePoint for Project Managers course, Carlos reached out to Tom Robbins for consulting opportunities to help them using Microsoft Project Online. Originally, they agreed on 100 consulting hours for the entire project. These hours were spent with the business units helping build a custom architecture to fit the needs of the organization. Tom conducted virtual and in-person meetings with internal stakeholders to properly gather business requirements, find out the mission and vision of what they wanted to accomplish, and analyze their use cases in order to build a brand-new system in Microsoft Project Online. With the information gathered, Tom helped configure, design, and build the platform to fit the specific needs the Georgia SRTA. Once the system was deployed, they refined it and fixed any bugs that were found.

After the initial deployment, Tom returned on-site to train the team members on the new system in order to increase user adoption. To provide the best results using the new technology, the Georgia SRTA wanted to create an internal training program. Tom conducted training sessions to teach internal trainers’ key strategies and best practices for orchestrating the trainings to guarantee adoption across teams.

The Results
With the successful deployment of the Microsoft Project Online platform, giving the organization full visibility and business intelligence into their project portfolio, the Georgia SRTA has increased their efficiency and productivity. Their dashboards provide real-time, immediate insight into more than 50 different projects.

By providing real-time data about resources, budget, and timelines, they freed up time that would have been spent aggregating the same data. This project and deployment of SharePoint with Microsoft Project Online allowed project management teams to break down siloes and collaborate using the SharePoint Project Managers Community. The portal created for project managers and other project participants is a space to ask questions, get answers and eliminate the need for internal email. They now also have a formal way to submit and weigh ideas aside their organization’s strategic drivers to decide which ideas become projects. Once these ideas are chosen, they go straight through the approval process.

With this successful initial deployment, their next steps will be to look toward the future at how they can incorporate this progress with a project management methodology. They also evaluated Microsoft Project Professional and the entire suite of Office 365 online tools to learn what worked best for them for them and have integrated those tools successfully. Carlos believes that with the help of Cprime Learning, they will be able to implement these methods and tools throughout the entire organization and continue to improve the way they work.

Increased visibility into projects using the dashboard that provides real-time, immediate insight into more than 50 different projects at once
Increased efficiency by utilizing real-time data on resources, budget, and timelines
Sped up project approval process with a formal way to submit and weigh ideas aside their organization’s strategic drivers
Increased transparency by giving organization full visibility and business intelligence into their project portfolio











Case Study #56

Company Details
Industry: Communications
Company Size: 10,350 Employees
Location: GA, US
Products: Consulting and Training
Cprime Services:
Ansible Bootcamp
Custom Group Training
Executive Summary
With a continually growing business and a lean, 11-person team the Director of Infrastructure needed to minimize the amount of manual tasks his team performed while continuously adding new servers. With the help of Cprime trainers, Verizon Media saw an increase in efficiency of 65% by learning and deploying Ansible.


  
Learn how Verizon Media increased efficiency by 65% in this Ansible case study.
More 2,000 security bugs fixed through automated bulk operations in two-days.
Improved collaboration between development teams.
Incremental and rapid steps toward 100% infrastructure and configuration as code.
The Challenge
Ansible Case Study: Keeping Up with Demand
Digital media conglomerate Verizon Media serves one billion customers world-wide across more than 20 brands. With such a large and continuously growing customer base, it is imperative that Verizon Media’s IT operations departments keep pace with the demands of the business and the market.

Director of Infrastructure and Platforms Engineering and Database Operations at Verizon Media, Ramesh, had two major challenges related to scaling the capabilities of his IT operations teams. His first challenge was to manage a continually growing number of servers with a lean, 11-person team. His second challenge was the need to minimize the amount of manual tasks his team was performing. Manually configuring a large number of servers made the work extremely time-consuming, error-prone, and at times not even feasible.

The Solution
Automating Capabilities
In this ansible case study, Read about how the team combatted challenges. Ramesh made a commitment to improve his teams’ capabilities through automation. His goal was to have 100% infrastructure and configuration as code by the end of 2019.

After testing several tools, Ramesh and his team found the configuration management tool, Ansible, to be the solution for accomplishing such an ambitious goal. To ensure they utilized the full capabilities of the tool, Ramesh enrolled his team into a private, onsite delivery of Ansible Configuration Management Boot Camp.

Training up on Ansible
The course material in the two-day, Ansible Boot Camp was exactly what his team was looking for. The course demonstrated the flexibility and power of Ansible, and how it can be used to build and scale a highly reliable infrastructure for their environments and projects. The course not only taught the need-to-know basics, but advanced applications of the tool as well, through a mixture of lecture and hands-on lab activities.

Because their team had to manually configure almost four dozen servers across multiple data centers, they were particularly enthused about the sections of the course that dealt with increasing the availability of infrastructure.  The team also found a great deal of value from the course modules focused on installing and using Ansible Playbooks and improving CI/CD pipelines using Ansible.






Case Study #57


Company Details
Industry: Government
Company Size: 1,600
Location: DC, US
Products: Consulting and Training
Cprime Services:
Custom Training
Executive Summary
After investing substantial time and effort into developing an internal training course for SharePoint the OIG quickly realized their employees were not adapting to the program. With help from Cprime trainers, a Sharepoint training program was developed that resulted in a 50% increase in use across four sites and 1,600 employees.


  
The Challenge
Like many organizations, the OIG invested substantial time and effort into their SharePoint deployment, only to quickly see that end user adoption was lacking. Although everything on the technology side had been done correctly, end users in the agency did not adopt the new tools. It was an archetypal example of a large SharePoint implementation that yielded little benefit to the organization.

From an end user point of view, effort is measured in the clicks it takes to navigate a task, and the seconds it takes to do. For example, even in today’s age of technology literacy and advanced UX design, users won’t spend time learning new places to click. Even simple tools won’t be adopted if a nominal amount of time isn’t taken to guide someone through a tour of new functions, and how to efficiently combine them into a process.

Likewise, if the processes a new groupware environment is designed to support aren’t faster or easier than what exists, then users simply won’t convert to something new, even if it looks better on paper. Therefore, it’s a relatively straightforward matter to anticipate how and why a platform like SharePoint may not get adopted.

The Solution
Like many other Cprime Learning enterprise SharePoint training customers, the Office of the Inspector General required a full complement of supportive services in order to make sure their training investment paid off. We began the process with due diligence and consulting, analyzing the OIG’s organizational processes and mapping training classes accordingly. Throughout the program, a priority of the partnership was establishing and monitoring benchmarks of success in order to make sure initial requirements were met.

This upfront analysis and curriculum design, combined with a structured monitoring process, allowed the training program to be verifiable and goal driven. If adjustments were needed or challenges occurred with benchmarking, Cprime Learning experts were on hand to provide follow-up coaching and verification that the SharePoint product and the user skills were being adopted as intended.

In summary, the following enterprise services formed the framework of the OIG’s training program:

Organizational process assessment
Enterprise needs analysis
Benchmarking and goal planning
Curriculum design
Enterprise training delivery
Follow-up coaching and benchmark verification
Cprime Learning developed and delivered custom SharePoint training for the OIG’s power users and end users. Power users needed more breadth of skills and had administrative responsibility, while end users needed specific, targeted skills. Cprime Learning accomplished this training specific to their needs. Cprime Learning’s SharePoint experts worked on site with the OIG SharePoint teams to understand why the previous deployment was unsuccessful and to focus on what could be done differently this time.

Cprime Learning’s SharePoint experts collected OIG’s proposed governance plan and policies, key user requirements and scenarios, as well as screenshots of the OIG branded environment to formulate training outlines designed to make sure the training we delivered would cover all of the key learning objectives. OIG wanted to deliver end user training to every user and power user training to all IT personnel. The focus of the end user training was to help secure successful usage of SharePoint, while the power user training was to help IT personnel prepare for addressing issues encountered by end users.









Case Study #58

Company Details
Industry: Government
Company Size: 12,500
Location: VA, US
Products: Consulting, Agile and DevOps Training
Cprime Services:
Custom Training
Agile Training
DevOps Training
Executive Summary
Between utilizing the waterfall method and a lack of standard tools the USPTO was experiencing large amounts of institutional waste. With help from Cprime trainers, they accomplished this goal in support of a wider Agile transformation.


  
The Challenge
Long, Waterfall-based Predictive Requirements Cycles
As with most large organizations, the norm for initiating projects, features and releases were to estimate and plan far upstream in the project process. By the time execution and delivery occurred, so much time had passed that often requirements or underpinning technologies had grown stale or misaligned with the needs of their organization. There was often no accurate way to know what was needed until work was well underway and estimates could be refined. By this time, funding needs were solidified and rarely aligned with actual project needs. In addition, the number of open projects in their portfolio was huge – hundreds of discrete projects were underway at any given time.

Competition Between Technology Teams and Product Ownership
In many cases, duplicate teams were doing the same type of work, but for different offices and groups. This duplication caused institutional waste, as well as taxing the teams doing the work as competing priorities vied for their capability. In addition, there were tooling and platform challenges. Different teams were using different toolsets at different places in the company, and management didn’t always know who was using what tool within the organization. This condition made it difficult to design efficient processes and build IT infrastructure blueprints that could be shared by different projects and teams.

Lack of Orchestration
Like many large organizations, the USPTO suffered from a lack of orchestration across their technology infrastructure and IT service capabilities, as well as many legacy services and hardware components which were difficult to refactor. Over time many of their systems had grown overly complicated. Most IT work revolved around individual projects, with no one entity in the agency having overall ownership of the enterprise architecture or the IT service portfolio. Furthermore, when a project was “done” there was no longer any funding available for the maintenance and support of artifacts created by that project. So over time, downstream infrastructure teams had grown heavily burdened with repairs and unplanned work around resolving problems.

Friction Between Contracted Development Teams and the Processes to enable Agile Continuous Improvement
At the USPTO, even after project work was scoped and initiated, it was very difficult for project teams to say no to a business customer or product owner. If the business put down a new requirement in the middle of a project, it had to get built. Exacerbating this challenge was the fact that the USPTO’s large project portfolio involved thousands of software developers – almost all contractors. They didn’t always get the best contractors because other government offices shared the contracting companies and were all bidding for their services. Contractors were also rarely held accountable for key areas of work, which are typically very important to a mature Agile practice, creating a significant impediment to large-scale agility.

The Solution
Coach and Train the Teams on Agile Practices
Over an eight-month period in 2016, we were engaged by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) to coach and train a wide variety of technology and development teams on Agile practices and next-generation toolchains and methodologies to help mature their Agile engineering capabilities and promote their newly instituted enterprise CI/CD practice.

Coaching was conducted as a series of seven onsite engagements and working sessions, during which we evaluated, collaborated and assisted with a number of issues and projects. Across this eight-month timeframe, our team worked with managers, branch chiefs, and teams, while simultaneously training their teams on Agile and DevOps practices.

Implement Better Tools for Managing Requirements
To help remedy the issue of waterfall-based predictive requirements cycles, our coaches worked with the USPTO’s teams to implement processes which were more accommodating of emergent requirements and oriented less around assumption. The trained engineers and branch chiefs on the implementation of Agile practices in application development projects, but also downstream of the application teams, specifically: DBA teams, infrastructure teams, and information security managers. Coaching services included guidance on the causes and ramifications of institutional work in progress (WIP) and tools for better managing it; including, Kanban techniques, a better understanding of queuing theory and functional batching, and coaching and training teams on lean process fundamentals. In many cases, we revealed opportunities to either save money or spend in a more incremental way.

Our coaches also evaluated and helped facilitate value stream mapping exercises for branch chiefs, project and program managers, and project teams. Once facilitation began, the USPTO staff was able to develop better visibility and prioritization across their portfolio of projects.

Managers and functional leads were taught how to conduct their own value stream mapping workshops in order to scale these visibility and prioritization practices deeper within the organization.

Decrease Waste and Increase Visibility into Systems through DevOps
Our coaches instituted awareness of newer DevOps-associated processes and tools to promote the adoption of a more loosely coupled platform-based IT architecture. We drove awareness of practices which focused on specific service-level, outcomes rather than functionally batched efficiency within siloed IT departments; for example, introducing use cases for microservices, internal service APIs, and cross-functional teams. Once again, the main focus was on enabling the agency to map and visualize where system-wide inefficiencies were occurring, such as duplicate work from competing parties and tightly coupled technology dependencies that no longer mapped to the current business needs of the agency.

USPTO worked with us to change contracting language and contractor requirements to better align with Agile styles of development, delivery, and support. These recommendations were designed to create the ability for contractors and projects to work within the confines of compliance and regulatory requirements while also increasing the maturity of the Agile practice. The coaching engagement also resulted in recommendation and guidance on using existing project scoping and funding protocols to institute process improvement projects. These projects were dedicated to discovering and implementing internal solutions which helped resolve many of the challenges the USPTO’s technology teams faced.

The Results
After receiving coaching, consulting, and training services, the USPTO gained multiple benefits like:

Moved beyond waterfall-based predictive requirements cycles
Broke down siloed development and technology teams
Decreased product ownership competition
Increased orchestration and coordination of their technology portfolio
Improved various processes necessary to enable agile continuous improvement









Case Study #59

Company Details
Industry: Education
Company Size: 3,300
Location: WA, US
Products: Consulting and Training
Cprime Services:
ITIL Training
Project Management Training
Executive Summary
The Kent School District focuses on training and saw an opportunity to pursue a full ITIL adoption so that everyone would share the same terminology. With the help of Cprime trainers, the program was a rousing success.


  
The Challenge
Employee development is extremely important at the Kent School District in Kent, WA. They make it a priority to invest in their staff and continually improve in every facet of their operations. As Joelle Bejarano, a PMP and ITIL certified Senior Project Manager at Kent stated:

Being a learning organization, it is important for us to continue to seek out and identify and offer learning opportunities for our staff. – Jolle Bejarano, Senior Project Manager

Joelle is responsible for ensuring that large, complex, customer-facing projects within the IT department are completed successfully. In 2016, during their spring break holiday, she coordinated a private onsite training session with us, following a recommendation by one of her colleagues. After discussing their options with National Account Manager, Taylor Dellostretto, they decided to take The Project Management Professional (PMP) Certification Exam Boot Camp in order to get a few of their employees certified, actionable, and up to speed.

Students and upper management alike were so impressed with their first training experience, that they once again booked us for a private, onsite ITIL training in the spring of 2017.

Get Everyone to Use the Same Terminology
It wasn’t one specific challenge that prompted Joelle and Tom Metcalf, Director of Technical Services, to seek ITIL training. Their primary goal was to have everyone within the department using the same terminology. Previously, the whole department informally adopted ITIL practices. However, some people were still unclear on ITIL language and methods, and were unable to communicate with the rest of the team efficiently.

The IT leadership team at Kent School District understood that in order to continually improve and increase efficiency and productivity, everyone in the department needed to reinforce and build on their existing understanding of the foundational elements of ITIL. The course they selected was the ITIL v3 Foundation Exam Preparation Boot Camp. By attending this course, employees would learn to understand ITIL terminology, structure, basic concepts, and the core principles of IT Service Management best practices.

Find Growth Opportunities
Tom and Joelle also wanted everyone in the department to understand how ITIL could make their department more efficient, have more successful outcomes, and be able to identify growth opportunities where ITIL practices had not been adopted. Their departments needed to understand the capabilities of the ITIL framework presented and learn how to think strategically using ITIL as a focal point.

The Solution
Integrate Real World Experiences
One of the specific objectives that Joelle brought to the table was that she wanted the instructor to integrate the school district’s real world experiences, projects, and situations into the course material. Joelle was concerned that some people might get lost if they reviewed more conceptual material.

On the first day of class, Joelle and a couple students informed Leslie Landry, the class instructor, that some of the early classroom exercises were still too conceptual. After hearing this feedback, Leslie customized the course content even more to match what was practiced in the Kent School District. For example, when discussing various roles in change management, students were able to use their coworkers’ names in the scenarios they role-played. Students were excited to learn how to apply ITIL practices to everyday situations they originally had not correlated with ITIL. Working with those real-world scenarios allowed the students to think of new ways to approach their practices and processes when they returned to their daily routine.

It was amazing to see how fast the canoe was going when everyone was rowing in the same direction. – Jolle Bejarano, Senior Project Manager

Build Custom Courseware
Since ITIL v3 Foundation Exam Preparation Boot Camp is a certification preparation course, Leslie still had to go “by-the-book” during class at times, but the students said she did a great job balancing teaching for the test and giving real-world scenarios that matched their environment. A prime example was when they discussed change management. At the time of this course delivery, it was unrealistic for Kent School District to follow change management practices “by-the-book” due to the level of their ITIL practice sophistication. Joelle believes that if Leslie had not customized the course content, the students may have felt bogged down by the overhead, saying,

Her flexibility in those regards was a huge help for us. – Donna Paulson, Director of Client Support Service

Due to Leslie’s mapped out customization of the course to fit Kent School District’s situation, students were more able to retain the knowledge they acquired in class. Donna Paulson, Director of Client Support Service, noted that she still hears her employees using buzzwords they learned in class.

Apply New Knowledge and Improve Systems
After taking the course, Joelle, Tom, and Donna saw their coworkers immediately apply their newly acquired knowledge. Specifically, Donna noted one of her employees is currently re-doing their ticketing system after learning more about ITIL, and his newfound understanding of ITIL is helping him improve the grouping and overall flow of the system. Donna also said another member of her team, Tyler, applied what he learned by implementing processes and steps into their new help desk system.

Since the training, Tom noticed senior members of the department who were previously just vaguely familiar with ITIL now speaking in clear and defined terms. Now that they had a foundation in ITIL, these senior members knew what specific changes they needed to incorporate into their existing systems and processes. The leadership team in the IT Department at Kent has worked hard on developing a strategic roadmap for growth. Because the foundation of ITIL spreads across many facets of IT, this training session enabled them to gain buy-in and increased understating from organizational leaders.

The effects of the training transcended from everyday tasks, to project based work, all the way to how we plan for the future in the ever-changing field of IT, which was a huge benefit.

The Results
Joelle, Tom, Donna and the rest of the IT leadership team at the Kent School District have seen a number of positive results after taking the ITIL v3 Foundation Exam Preparation Boot Camp. After the course, they had a debriefing session during which they identified growth opportunities where they have not yet adopted ITIL practices.  For instance, change management and incident management processes.

A few benefits Kent School District experienced in the few months include:

Improved help desk ticketing tool
Developed a service catalog available to customers
Broke down silos by improving systems, therefore, allowing cross-team collaboration
Decreased time of ticket creation
It will be a continual effort from this point forward, and one that I hope that we can build on in the years to come. This is learning we can use every day. – Tom Metcalf, Director of Technical Services

Whether it’s the change management process for rolling out a new system, or incident response for an unplanned outage, the IT staff at the Kent School District plan to use what they learned in class in all areas of their work. After taking ITIL training with Cprime Learning, they now see their department more as a service provider focused on their customers’ success.

Now having gone through the ITIL training, it’s another lens we can look through to
ultimately better support our customers. – Donna Paulson, Director of Client Support Service

 









 Case Study #60

 Company Details
Industry: Fast Food
Company Size: Fortune 200
Cprime Services:
DevOps Training
Executive Summary
A Fortune 200 Fast Food Company was developing a new Learning Journey and identified Cprime as the optimal partner to make this happen. After developing a deploying a suite of DevOps learning courses, the company saw a 15% decrease in change failure rate along with improved productivity across the board.


  
The Challenge
A Fortune 200 Fast Food Company was developing a new Learning Journey centered on DevOps, the IT methodology that increases business value by improving collaboration and communication between development teams and operations teams. To ensure the success of the DevOps Learning Journey, the Fortune 200 Fast Food Company looked outside of their organization to find a training partner they could trust to deliver high-quality DevOps training courses.

The project manager of the DevOps Learning Journey, an internal DevOps Evangelist, found Cprime Learning’s DevOps and IT services. She was impressed by the robust DevOps curriculum, which included training courses on topics including Containerization, Configuration Management and Continuous Integration (CI)/ Continuous Delivery (CD) tools. After a series of phone meetings with Cprime Learning’s DevOps experts, the Fortune 200 Fast Food Company made the decision to partner with Cprime Learning as the exclusive training provider for their DevOps Learning Journey

The Solution
Since having an Agile mindset and being services oriented are core principles at the Fortune 200 Fast Food Company, it was only natural they chose the DevOps Implementation Boot Camp as their flagship training course. Cprime Learning worked with the client’s IT leadership to customize the course content to fit their specific needs by sending managers and team leaders to a pilot session of the DevOps Boot Camp so they could provide feedback on what topics needed to be added and taken out. Cprime Learning took the feedback from the managers and worked with one of Cprime Learning’s top DevOps course developers and instructors, Alan Koch, to fully customize the DevOps Implementation Boot Camp to the client’s specifications.

After a student attends the DevOps Implementation Boot Camp, an elective course is scheduled three to four weeks later. These elective courses are hand-picked by the DevOps Evangelist and her team. Much like the DevOps Implementation Boot Camp, each elective course is customized to fit the client’s unique situation and project scenarios. The first two electives of the DevOps Learning Journey were the Introduction to Kubernetes and Continuously Delivery Workshop courses.

The Results
The DevOps Learning Journey has been tremendously successful. Management and students alike are extremely pleased with the training provided by Cprime Learning. Students have Improved their productivity and development pipelines through the use of containerization tools like Docker and Kubernetes. By automating their processes, the change failure rate has decreased by approximately 15%, and development teams have more time to focus on developing new features. The Fortune 200 Fast Food Company plans to send more than 200 employees through the DevOps Learning Journey by the end of year one, with the goal of all 1500 members of their IT staff going through the training program.

15% decrease in change failure rate
Improved productivity and development pipeline through the use of containerization tools like Docker and Kubernetes
Increased time spent on developing new features due to automating processes that were done manually prior to training











Case Study #61

Company Details
Industry: Transportation
Company Size: Fortune 500
Cprime Services:
Agile Transformation
Executive Summary
After being a strictly Waterfall organization for decades, a Fortune 500 Transportation organization decided it was time to implement Agile. Their long, complex projects, and the inability to switch gears easily and manage interruptions, resulted in a system that was inefficient and unproductive. With the help of Cprime consultants, coaches, and trainers, they successfully completed their Agile transformation and saw lower staff turnover and fewer production defects, translating to millions of dollars earned.


  
The Challenge
From Waterfall to Agile
After being a strictly Waterfall organization for decades, a Fortune 500 Transportation organization decided it was time to implement Agile. Following the Waterfall model, requirements gathering would occur at the beginning of a large project, and by the time execution and delivery took place, sometimes 6-7 months later, they no longer aligned with the wants and needs of stakeholders. These long, complex, projects, and the inability to switch gears easily and manage interruptions, resulted in a system that was inefficient and unproductive. Because of their methods, projects were taking longer than expected and the Fortune 500 Transportation organization was in desperate need of a solution.

Several employees believed that Agile was the answer early on, so they attempted to take steps towards Agility without proper training. Unfortunately, as is often the case, this hurt more than it helped. Within the organization, employees were frequently moved around among teams, and because some teams were practicing different levels of Agile while others weren’t practicing at all, the processes were different throughout the organization. This created an unnecessary adjustment period that occurred every time someone moved teams. Because of the lack of consistency, they decided to look outside of the organization for formal training. They knew that in order to be truly Agile, the mindset would have to change from the top all the way down.

The Solution
Private, Onsite Agile Training
To initially create awareness around Agile within the organization, Cprime started with private, onsite deliveries of Agile Boot Camp and Agile Executive Workshop for select employees. Although these courses were a great way to get the teams excited initially, they quickly realized a need for additional solutions in order to create more alignment around an Agile Transformation. To help pinpoint areas that needed improvement, Cprime performed an Assessment of the organization’s current Agile practices by bringing in a subject-matter-expert for two days to conduct interviews and observe the current teams and processes. After completing the Assessment, Cprime designed a solution to help them reach their business goal, which was then presented to the organization’s executive management team. Based on the results of the Assessment and deliberation from the executive management team, it was determined that Cprime would provide one Agile coach over the course of 3 months, as well as conduct 7 to 10 training courses throughout the process whenever deemed necessary.

Agile Coaching and Consulting
Jointly, Cprime and the organization hand-picked an Agile Coach for their Agile Transformation. The Cprime Coaches role as an outside Agile expert was to assist in auditing and measuring how people were using Agile, and helping them work through their implementation in real time, putting it to practice rather than just learning it as a concept. The Cprime Coach worked with internal leaders and change agents to act as a guide and provide a positive outlook on the transition to Agile. She helped leadership initiate a movement across the organization, which was even tag lined internally as “Move the Needle,” in order to generate awareness and excitement around their Agile Transformation.

The Results
Technical and Cultural Success
Although many teams had discussed implementing Agile for years, the employees at this organization truly believe that bringing an outside expert coach in to assess their current practices and help structure the new Agile teams was exactly what they needed. It was not only a technical success, but an internal cultural success as well. By using Agile across teams, they are now able to pivot more easily by working in smaller increments, giving them the ability to prioritize and re-prioritize as they go. The Agile environment has drastically increased collaboration, transparency and productivity.

With Cprime ’s help, this organization was able to construct their own internal Agile training that focuses on the basics of Agility for new teams and new hires. They also hired internal employees to take over the roles of Agile leadership, and are confident and mature enough in their practices to continue improving their Agile practices on their own.

They saw the following results:

Reduction in turnover of development staff by 25% from the previous year
Implementation of new Quality Assurance tools which reduced defects in production by 82% over the previous
year’s metrics
Successful release of one product on time and two products earlier than originally anticipated by using the Agile
methods, which increased forecasted revenue by approximately $4M.
Training and development of internal, full time employee Agile coaches












Case Study #61

Company Details
Industry: Software Company
Company Size: Fortune 200
Cprime Services:
Agile Training Courses
DevOps Training Courses
Executive Summary
This Fortune 200 human resource software company wanted to partner with a training vendor to develop and deliver a custom new hire onboarding program. The goal was to to attract top talent from college campuses, recruiting them for software engineering, IT operations and IT infrastructure roles. With help from Cprime trainers, the company saw increases in employee retention, productivity, and revenue per employee.


  
The Challenge
Custom New Hire Onboarding
A Fortune 200 human resource software company wanted to partner with a training vendor to develop and deliver a custom new hire onboarding program. The intent of the program was to attract top talent from college campuses, recruiting them for software engineering, IT operations and IT infrastructure roles and positions.

After several months of meetings with various training companies, they had not found a vendor that could provide an adequate solution. Many vendors proposed solutions that were too long, too expensive or too cumbersome. At this point, an employee in the procurement office remembered how easy it was work with Cprime Learning. The senior director for global talent acquisition then contacted Cprime Learning’s enterprise programs team and together sketched out an IT graduate new hire onboarding program that could meet their needs and budget. After presenting the CIO with a proposal showcasing the program elements, Cprime Learning gained approval and began developing two new hire onboarding programs for the client.

The Solution
The primary goal of the client’s new hire onboarding program was to accelerate the development of recent college graduates with IT and computer science degrees to become effective and productive employees as quickly as possible by giving them specific technology and business skills training.

Cprime Learning Onboarding Programs
Cprime Learning created two, six-week onboarding programs that would run simultaneously. They taught the graduates Agile and DevOps practices, and provided hands-on experience in tools used within the client’s IT department, enabling new hires to be “Day-one ready.” During the program, students completed assessments to track their understanding and success and worked on a case study in parallel to promote collaboration among themselves and prove their abilities.


Agile Methodology – agile team dynamics, story review, iteration execution
Analysis – going from strategy to execution, project management, change management
Architecture – system architecture, data center architecture, company OS breakdown
Infrastructure – storage, networking, virtualization, containerization
DevOps – culture, patterns, and anti-patterns
Automation – orchestration, Linux and Windows scripting and automation
Configuration Management – configuration management with Ansible and Puppet
Tools and Clouds – tool overview (vRA, DBaaS, zVM, HPOO, BladeLogic), deployment and resource management in the cloud
Database Technologies – database design, database normalization, database programming, SQL applications
NoSQL – working with MongoDB and Cassandra
Security and Risk Management – secure software development, incident response, identity
and access management

Agile Methodology – agile team dynamics, story review, iteration execution
Analysis – going from strategy to execution, project management, change management
Application Modeling with UML – structural diagramming, behavioral diagramming, interaction diagramming
DevOps – DevOps terms, definitions, and vernacular
Security and Risk Management – secure software development, incident response, identity and access management
Development Management Tools – Jenkins, Maven, Git, BitBucket
Scripting – JQuery, Bootstrap, Angular 2
VDL – philosophy and principles of VDL, VDL Patterns
Java Programming – Tomcat, Spring, Spring MVC, Spring Boot
Testing and Test Automation – Agile testing mindset & process, test-driven development with Junit
Database Technologies – database design, database normalization, database programming, SQL applications
NoSQL – working with MongoDB and Cassandra
Application Development – testing integration, data-driven web applications with Java, Web Services
The secondary goal of the program was to assign the recent graduates into different teams within the company. To help facilitate this, students were grouped into project teams at the beginning of the program. The teams’ ultimate task was to develop and deploy a product. It was left up to the project teams to determine how to create the product. At the close of the program, teams completed a final exam, presented their finished product to the organization’s IT manager, celebrated with a social hour. This entire process helped the IT managers choose which new hires would fit well in their teams from both a technical and cultural aspect.

The Results
Employee Preparedness & New Hire Retention
At the completion of the Cprime Learning contract, the organization made a decision to license the content for the new hire onboarding program. They run the program multiple times each year, in various locations across the globe.

The current measurable results of the new hire onboarding program include but are not limited to:

16% increase in new hire retention
54% greater new hire productivity
17% increase in revenue per full-time employee
In summary, Cprime Learning and the client worked together to create a detailed, hands-on program to solve issues such as lack of real-world preparedness of college graduates entering their company and new hire retention.











Case Study #63

Company Details
Industry: Brokerage Firm
Cprime Services:
DevOps Implementation Boot Camp (ICP-FDO)
Docker Containerization Boot Camp
Big Data Boot Camp
Data Analysis Boot Camp
Project Management 101 - The Fundamentals of Project Management
The Project Management Professional (PMP) Certification Exam Boot Camp
Executive Summary
A Brokerage Firm was in the middle of being acquired by one of their larger competitors. As is common during large acquisitions, massive layoffs were unavoidable. While the executives were handling the logistics of the merger, the Learning and Development department was tasked with providing training opportunities for more than 1700 IT professionals at the company. In the end, 90% of the students rated their experience as excellent.


  
The Challenge
New Acquisitions
A large Brokerage Firm was in a unique and challenging situation. The Brokerage Firm was in the middle of being acquired by one of their larger competitors. As is common during large acquisitions, massive layoffs were unavoidable. While the executives were handling the logistics of the merger, the Learning and Development department was tasked with providing training opportunities for more than 1700 IT professionals at the company. The purpose of this training was to give their employees in-demand skills and certifications so that they would be better prepared for their positions at the new company, or in the event of a laid-off, to prepare them for their next career opportunity.

The Solution
Cprime Learning Training Courses
Having been a trusted training partner in years past, the L&D Department turned to Cprime for help. In a collaborative effort, a list of desired skills and knowledge the associates would need to succeed was put together and specific training courses were mapped to provide the necessary training. In the end, 15 different course titles and over 100 classes were scheduled and delivered between January and June. Cprime worked closely with L&D on a weekly base and provided logistics support to include facility readiness, course material, virtual lab access, and Instructor communication. At the end of each delivery, data collected from post-event evaluations were summarized and provided back to senior leadership at the Brokerage Firm that reported on satisfaction and skills acquired.

There were 15 different courses delivered during this program across four major categories:

DevOps & Containerization
• DevOps Implementation Boot Camp (ICP-FDO)
• Docker Containerization Boot Camp
Developer Languages
• Introduction to Java 8 Programming For Developers New to OO Programming
• Java 8 Programming For OO Experienced Developers
• Mastering Angular 2
• Mastering JEE Web Applications
Data Analysis & Data Engineering
• Big Data Boot Camp
• Data Analysis Boot Camp
• Informatica PowerCenter – Official Informatica Course
• SQL Essentials
• SQL Query Optimization
• Oracle PL/SQL Programming
Project Management
• Project Management 101 – The Fundamentals of Project Management
• The Project Management Professional (PMP) Certification Exam Boot Camp
The Results
During the six month engagement, Cprime Learning trained over 750 IT Professionals at the Brokerage Firm. Ninety percent of the associates that took part in the program believed that they received excellent training and services. Eighty percent of the associates said that they learned additional skills that will be beneficial in their career. Overall, the Brokerage Firm saw improvements in quality of work, process efficiency and morale among the employees that participated in the training program.

90% of learners rated their overall satisfaction as “Excellent”
More than 80% of learners reported gaining additional skills
Improved quality of work, process efficiency, and morale














Case Study #64

Company Details
Industry: Consulting
Company Size: 300
Location: CA, US
Products: Agile Marketing Boot Camp
Cprime Services:
Agile Marketing Foundation Package
Agile Consulting
Agile Training
Executive Summary
Cprime's marketing team was facing problems of transparency into the rest of the company. This created accountability issues, a disorganized backlog, and strained relationships with internal stakeholders, including product management and sales. With the help of Cprime coaches and trainers, the marketing team has achieved huge improvements in productivity and efficiency.


  
The Challenge
Creating an Agile Foundation to Build-Off
Like many marketing departments, Cprime’s team had limited transparency into the rest of the company. This created accountability issues, a disorganized backlog, and strained relationships with internal stakeholders, including product management and sales. There were many instances when the sales or product management team would request tasks to be completed by the Marketing team, but had no idea when or if they would be completed. Tasks lost in long email chains, or details forgotten over water cooler conversations became problems.

In this agile marketing case study, learn how the team used a spreadsheet to keep track of requests and campaign ideas, but it was a free-for-all of what was getting done and when. This caused not only a lack of trust from outside stakeholders, but also internally within the department because there was no way to keep members accountable for their projects.

Due to the distrust, lack of organization, and poor use of time, there were no established methods to measure the success or failure of campaigns. It would take weeks, or even months, to execute a full campaign, which resulted in wasted time, dollars, and effort.

The Solution
Implementing the Skills Learned From The Agile Training
The solution started with three internal change agents, the Vice President of Marketing, the Marketing Manager, and a Marketing Specialist attended the two-day Agile Marketing Boot Camp. They were able to implement what they learned from the boot camp immediately into their everyday work routine before they even left the classroom.

Ceremonies and artifacts were the first Agile methods implemented. The team started conducting daily stand-ups and weekly planning meetings with Planning Poker. The creation of a team velocity chart, a formal backlog, a running Kanban board, and a digital marketing request system allowed the team to organize and prioritize projects. It also helped them break down and iterate complex campaigns to gather real-time data before releasing the projects to customers.

Marketing departments operate very differently from one another, so Cprime Learning’s Agile Marketing Boot Camp is intended to give teams a foundation in Agile Marketing methods in order to help them create their own “flavor” of Agile Marketing that works best for their teams.

The Results
Becoming More Efficient as a Team
With the skills they gained from Agile Marketing Boot Camp, the Cprime marketing department is able to launch campaigns, gather results, and make changes quickly. They no longer waste time on long projects that don’t produce returns. Relationships with both product management and sales have drastically improved as well. With increased visibility into marketing activities and strategies, they have created an open-door, collaborative environment for the entire organization.










Case Study #65

Company Details
Industry: Benefits Administration Management
Company Size: 200+ Employees
Location: U.S.
Cprime Services:
DevOps Solutions
Product Agility Solutions
SAFe Transformation
Executive Summary
When this leading benefits administration management organization recognized the need for an Agile/DevOps transformation at scale, they committed fully to big action and an aggressive timetable. Leaning on Cprime’s expertise, the program came together quickly with impressive results: significantly greater efficiency in both production and bug resolution, along with better resource allocation.


  
Alegeus operates the industry’s largest and most comprehensive consumer healthcare funding platform. Its proprietary technology powers health savings accounts (HSAs) and similar tax-advantaged accounts for more than 225,000 employer groups, touching more than 30 million consumers. The company owns a full 40% of the benefit accounts in the market, processing more than $9.1 billion in annual healthcare payments. Both a cause and effect of this industry-leading position, Alegeus has grown quickly since the founding of MBI Benefits just 23 years ago. Today, their development organization is more than 200 strong. Following an acquisition by Vista Equity Partners and a deep review of the current state and planned journey, Vista recommended a transformation to SAFe, an Agile DevOps methodology.

A Remedy for Growing Pains
“In the world where productivity, quality and time-to market of innovative software define success of a technology company, old ways of delivering with longer cycles and in waterfall methodology did not work for us anymore“ said Kirill Izotov, VP of Engineering at Alegeus. “Inefficiency was starting to erode the team’s effectiveness.”

“The Executive Team and Vista Equity Partners Alegeus Board of Directors saw the value in gaining increased speed-to-value and reduced cost-of-wait states inherent in a waterfall process, and they were willing to make the investment in this major organizational transformation” said Derek Holmes, Alegeus CIO.

The Board of Directors charged Izotov and other Alegeus product and technology leaders with transforming the Alegeus WealthCare platform delivery with Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe) methodology, under the umbrella of a new product-led culture.

With that in mind, Izotov began researching potential solutions that Alegeus could pursue to streamline and accelerate the transition to a new culture and a new way of ideating, planning and behaving at all levels of the organization — executive, middle-management and professional. Change management was the key to success, as well as a choice of the transformation partner.

“We were very diligent in selecting a partner who could help us structure our SAFe transformation program, training and coaching on all levels of the organization, and new tools implementation to support SAFe transformation success at Alegeus,” Izotov says. “We vetted several key players in the market, and Cprime became a company of choice as they met all the criteria – from the range of services to quality of specialists, and to references from their
previous successful engagements.”

“By the time Alegeus contacted us, they already had a good idea of what they wanted,” recalls Chris Riley, Cloud Technology Delivery Director at Cprime, “and, more importantly, key decision makers at every level of the organization had already aligned on the need for a solution.”

With Riley’s help, Alegeus further honed their motivations to the following:

Be more strategic and data-driven
Build a more stable, robust IT infrastructure that could support future growth
Bring in new tools and technology to improve how they develop software
Reduce technical debt, simplify and create process efficiencies
Move from being a project-focused to a product-focused organization
Continue industry leadership based on a culture of innovation
This clarity allowed Cprime consultants to propose a holistic, three-pronged approach that could quickly and effectively address the unique challenges faced by the client, involving:

DevOps
Product Agility
SAFe Transformation
The Challenge
Every Agile/DevOps transformation or scaling program is unique, so they couldn’t walk into it with preconceptions. After a brief initial assessment period, Cprime addressed the following challenges to help Alegeus meet their ambitious goals:

Technology
The existing infrastructure was, in many ways, outdated and inadequate for the tasks at hand.

As is often the case in fast-growing organizations, Alegeus utilized a dizzying array of different apps for various aspects of their business and development processes. Most of these didn’t play well with the others, impeding collaboration and efficiency as teams relied on different systems. Exacerbating the problem, the development team had been growing across three offices and two time zones, along with a small contingent in India.

“They had a clear vision of where they wanted to end up from a tooling perspective,” says Riley, “so the DevOps team could move forward with a clear end goal in mind.”

Izotov recognized that Alegeus’ development teams were relying heavily on manual testing, with results being tracked via spreadsheet. This left significant gaps in both their testing capabilities and their backlog of data. He set out a clear mission for their DevOps capabilities by the project’s end:

They needed to solidify their Agile practice to break down work into smaller parts and establish regular iterative releases.
They needed tools that would help them release software more quickly and provide metrics and data to support continual improvement.
They needed those tools to be integrated with the wider product management and portfolio systems so they could focus on planning.
He went on to outline their pre-selected tools: they would use Aha to track what executives and customers wanted, then pull that into Azure DevOps to create and track the required stories epics. The final missing link was a robust automated testing process to confirm software quality, also facilitated through Azure DevOps.

With all these pieces in place, Azure DevOps would become their single source of truth — a full chain of custody supporting every product from idea to final release.

Methodology
Alegeus had a well-established waterfall development process in place, so moving to Agile development practices would be a dramatic shift. When they decided against a smaller pilot program in favor of a full transformation of their core platform value stream, it amplified the potential for push-back.

To embrace Agile and establish a product focus in this way, the developers involved in the brand-new Agile Release Train would need to navigate training and significant organizational and procedural changes while keeping up with work-in-progress and commitments made for the period of the engagement.

Devin Anderson, Strategic Product Coach at Cprime, notes, “Rather than just bringing us in to teach them a process, they wanted us to partner with them strategically.” This willingness to work with Cprime experts on a holistic solution across multiple teams and disciplines would prove to be a deciding factor in the success of the program.

Timetable
Initial discussions with Alegeus began in September of 2019. Cprime held a Value Stream Workshop for company executives in October as an example of how the partnership would look and feel. At the time, Alegeus was eyeing January of 2020 as their target start date for the engagement.

In preparation, Izotov took an unusual step that proved exceptionally valuable: “I decided to train ten key middle managers from the dedicated teams as SPCs (SAFe Program Consultants) without requiring certification. As a result, we had ten influential stakeholders who were knowledgeable and could help field questions during the wider rollout. But, more importantly, they were excited about the change, which removed a potential impediment.”

The October workshop experience was so positive, the executive team unanimously voted to get started immediately. They set March as the target for wrapping up the initial training and reorganization process, leaving precious little time for such a massive undertaking.

“There was a real energy there,” Riley recalls, “a willingness to jump into new tools and processes. We don’t always see that from clients, especially at the start.”

Change Management
One of the keenest challenges facing any organization undertaking an Agile transformation is change management. Both people and processes have inherent inertia, some stronger than others. Change is often uncomfortable and can even be a source of fear or anger. Alegeus was no exception.

“For one thing, moving from Waterfall to Agile required a lot of changes right up front,” says Jeff Shilling, Delivery Manager at Cprime. “They don’t call it a transformation for nothing.” Anderson adds, “The Alegeus PMO had been taking a bottom-up approach to their project management. They approached product lines almost like separate business units, prioritizing work differently in each. They were going to be moving to a top-down planning process supporting scaled agile and product management. It was a lot to take on.”

“In many ways, we reorganized the whole development organization,” says Riley. “So many people had to come to terms with the question, ‘Who’s responsible for what?”

COVID-19
In addition to all of the above, the first COVID-19 lockdown orders occurred right after the teams completed their very first Planning Increment (PI) in early March. This unforeseen situation necessitated additional coaching to help the teams maintain their newly-learned procedures under unfamiliar remote working circumstances.

The Solution
The holistic approach proposed by Cprime — and energetically supported by Alegeus —included the following moving parts:

Detailed assessments of the current “lay of the land” across all three disciplines
Educational webinars for executives and decision-makers to guide rapid change
Creation of custom training content for the new tools, including a repository for
future reference
Implementation and configuration of a suite of new tools, including Aha! and five cloud-based development applications on the Microsoft Azure cloud platform, including Azure DevOps.
Zoom-based and on-site DevOps training for nearly 200 developers in classes of 15-20 each.
This included a tremendous amount of custom content built to teach the teams how to use all the necessary tools, including Azure DevOps Repos and Azure DevOps Pipelines.
Product Discovery and Delivery training for more than 60 members of the product management teams
Three days of onsite product management training
Two product management workshops to facilitate the hands-on application of learned concepts
Comprehensive SAFe training for more than 150 people
Coaching around planning and implementing the first PI
Coaching around switching to remote work while maintaining best practices
Ongoing coaching calls and executive Lifelines to support continual improvement
Timing, tooling, and training had to align to ensure the Alegeus engineering teams could hit the ground running with their first PI.

“We needed to coordinate extensively with each other and with the client,” Anderson says. Riley notes, “I give a lot of credit to Kirill for how smoothly everything went. He was like a head coach leading his team to victory. There were strong individual players on each development team, so he sent them the plays, relied on the team to run them, and they did.”

Izotov concurs, “In the end, Agile is about people. We were looking for a partner we could gel with, the right people for the job. Cprime was that trusted partner.”

The Results
At the writing of this case study, Alegeus is just completing their second PI. Cprime assists with ad hoc coaching, tooling optimization and consulting with leadership, but the development teams have fulfilled the self-management aspects of Agile admirably.

“We watched the teams move from a project mindset to a product mindset,” Izotov notes,“ and that’s a huge change. We have a ways to go, but now we have both the roadmap and the foundational knowledge to ensure we’ll get where we need to be.”

“This process was truly a transformation for Alegeus product teams as well,” adds John Bull, Head of Product for Alegeus, “We have always had a great working relationship with technology as a product-led organization, but SAFe and Cprime best practices have fostered better collaboration, which allows us to learn fast and make adjustments early so we can deliver what the clients truly want.”

Some powerful results Alegeus has already noted include:

Elimination of nearly all the waiting periods and unproductive time inherent to waterfall stages
More effective allocation of resources via assigning teams by competency
Significant reduction in turnaround time to address production bugs
Additionally, as the COVID-19 situation evolved, the Alegeus teams needed to move to a work from-home model unexpectedly, which was entirely new to them. Although there was an initial learning curve, they credit the Agile practices they were learning with shortening the learning curve and removing what would otherwise have been a long period of decreased productivity using their previous workflow.

Since the start of the transformation, the ART produced multiple releases, delivering new features and value to Alegeus customers faster than before, in smaller increments. There have also been noted improvements in their planning as they have fully embraced the Discovery process — not just focusing on how to do the work, but how to choose the right work to do.

These are some comments from Alegeus team members:

“I like the new team structure because I feel more connected to what we’re trying
to accomplish.”
“I feel like I know more about what’s going on and how I fit into the bigger picture.”
“I’m more connected to the product, and it’s exciting to approach the next task with
the customer in mind.”
“I’m closer to my team, and we all feel more accountable for the quality of our work”
Perhaps Izotov sums it up best: “Cprime brought so much to the table: transformation expertise and experience, technical implementation competency, and highly effective people skills that
meant so much to the success of the transformation.”

After accomplishing a massive Agile transformation, Alegeus can maintain its leading role in the benefits management industry. With continual improvement now baked into everything they do, that’s unlikely to change any time soon.












Case Study #66

Company Details
Industry: Integrated Health Management
Location: Wayne, PA
Products: Atlassian Solutions
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Solutions
Executive Summary
In its own operations, Medecision has put agile principles into action both before and during the pandemic. Partnering with strategic consultants such as Cprime and using solutions from Atlassian, the company has trained and certified stakeholders in not only engineering, but also finance, customer service and a number of other business units as part of an effort to scale agile across the organization.

Medecision
  
Rick Koloski, group senior vice president of engineering and architecture at the healthcare firm Medecision, discusses how enterprise agility has helped the business respond to COVID-19 and prepare for what’s next.

In the healthcare sector, change tends to happen at a glacial pace. In addition to regulatory and privacy-related challenges, adopting innovative technologies often means weighing potential benefits against short-term risks to patients. Even as a new wave of telemedicine and wearable health devices suggests an impending sea change in the way patients access and experience care, the industry has been among the slowest to adopt new technology.

COVID-19 has fundamentally changed the speed at which the healthcare sector innovates. In a matter of months, healthcare providers have leapt ahead to provide remote checkups or stand up AI-driven helplines designed to manage an unprecedented spike in demand. In a moment when all eyes are on healthcare leaders to meet a historic crisis with an equally powerful response, stakeholders ranging from hospitals to diagnostic laboratories are accelerating their own long-gestating transformations.

But true change doesn’t happen without adopting new approaches to work. One key element is enterprise agility — an approach to systems, processes and operations that allows businesses to nimbly respond to change. It encompasses both digital transformation and culture shift, pulling together data from multiple disciplines and enabling new forms of collaboration.

“At the enterprise scale, bringing agile thinking should include product engineering, finance and a number of other disciplines,” says Rick Koloski, group senior vice president of engineering and architecture at Medecision. “Informing those areas and making the whole enterprise resilient to the new pace of change means going from the canonically popular model of agile software development to true enterprise agility.”

As an integrated health management solutions provider supporting virtual care and digital health, Medecision sits at the center of many of the trends reshaping healthcare. Its flagship offering, Aerial, is an integrated, cloud-based platform that unifies the vast streams of data endemic to the industry (everything from lab results to insurance claims). It then applies predictive analytics to support better decision-making, both in terms of business management and overall patient experience, which drives improved health outcomes.

For consumers, this creates new opportunities to take a more active and informed role in their personal health. For healthcare providers, it means gaining visibility across the care-management spectrum — and implementation of an agile, adaptable methodology.

“In the same way that a technology company might utilize various collaborative and workflow solutions, Aerial helps our clients manage the interactions involved in care delivery,” Koloski says. “As a care manager, you can see not only upcoming appointments, but also video and text interactions in a unified way. That’s the same thing in terms of our implementation of enterprise agility.”

In the COVID-19 era, the platform’s agile workflow infrastructure has enabled care managers and community case workers to assist patients remotely, while also building support plans and tracking reimbursement from Medicare or Medicaid. As a result, at-risk populations have been able to stay home with their families during the pandemic, keeping them out of hospitals and other potential hotspots.

“Faced with a global health crisis, the industry at large has had to accelerate the pace of change,” says Nanne Finis, RN MS and chief nurse executive at workforce management firm Kronos. “Organizations are forced to work across their own environments to rapidly deploy and execute change, which comes in the form of personnel staffing, scheduling, benefit payment and resource planning, as well as environmental changes in the way work is done — all of which has to be communicated and exponentially repurposed to address a dire need in this extraordinary time.”

In its own operations, Medecision has put agile principles into action both before and during the pandemic. Partnering with strategic consultants such as Cprime and using solutions from Atlassian, the company has trained and certified stakeholders in not only engineering, but also finance, customer service and a number of other business units as part of an effort to scale agile across the organization.

In doing so, it has automated key processes, broken down silos and enabled new modes of collaboration. While aspects of agile (like face-to-face communication) have been challenged during the pandemic, Medecision’s use of Atlassian solutions has enabled cross-functional planning even as it transitions teams to operate remotely.

An agile approach has also helped the business set itself up to thrive in the post-COVID-19 world. While no one knows what the future holds, Koloski predicts that virtual doctor’s visits will become even more popular, with fewer hurdles for patients hoping to take advantage of telehealth. Meanwhile, secure, HIPAA-compliant solutions for information-sharing may make the healthcare sector more digital, bringing it in line with the paperless experience found commonly in banking and travel. While these trends were present in healthcare prior to the viral outbreak, the current crisis has spurred their acceptance, making it a watershed moment for businesses like Medecision.

“Our virtual health engagement offerings have been under development for years, but adoption had been slow. People had muscle memory about walking into urgent care facilities or their primary care provider’s office,” Koloski says. “With COVID-19, the barrier to adoption has been removed, and our solutions are being used in new and innovative ways. In a positive sense, it’s been game-changing for how people receive healthcare.”

Atlassian empowers enterprise agility with solutions like Jira, Trello and Confluence.














Case Study #77

Company Details
Industry: Financial Services
Company Size: 16,000
Location: NY, US
Cprime Services:
Scaled Agile Framework
Agile Transformation
Atlassian Consulting
Executive Summary
Change is always challenging, especially for large companies well-established in their markets. But change is a necessary obstacle for any company pursuing growth. With a development team over 5,000 strong and tight time constraints, this large American financial services company entrusted Cprime with guiding an enterprise initiative for their Agile transformation and software tool migration.


  
Overview
This organization is a large financial services firm that is a leading provider of financial services in the academic, research, medical, cultural, and governmental fields, with over 15,000 employees across the US. A lot about the organization’s clientele and the financial environment they’re living in has changed, however. And this is the reason the organization is committed to continuous improvement in the breadth, depth, and quality of the tools they provide their agents and clients, and the speed with which those tools are developed. That’s why the organization undertook a massive Agile transformation, choosing Atlassian tools for their robust capabilities and Cprime to guide them along this important journey.

The Challenge
Getting The Company Up to Date
Like any large successful company, this financial services organization faced a host of challenges leading up to and during their Agile transformation:

An aging, inadequate set of solutions that duplicated or negated each other’s output
A large, diverse group of developers who yearned for a better solution, but paradoxically clung to the old one
A whole new agile framework (SAFe) that had a steep learning curve and changes to culture
Three separate agile methodologies being used across the organization plus waterfall execution on other efforts
The standard twin challenges facing all large organizations managing change: inertia and momentum
And, on top of all this, a shorter-than-average time frame due to looming tools license expirations

It Started Seeking A New Tool…
The journey began when the organization recognized that their current development management and collaboration solution — Rational Team Concert (RTC) by IBM — was no longer filling their needs, and was, in fact, creating bottlenecks in an already complex delivery process.



One of the key stakeholders recalls the situation this way: “We had to get off the RTC platform. In our environment, we had way too many tools doing work item management — same workload, same type of work, but three different tools. And the idea was to get down to one tool that could work and drive us forward.”

So, the organization began hunting for a new tool to better support the scrum-based agile development process they had in place. After some time, they were working with a consulting firm and had determined that Atlassian Jira was the core tool they wanted and needed. They were on the cusp of signing a contract to move ahead with a Jira implementation. However, they ran into some pushback from the business teams who were suggesting CollabNet VersionOne or Rally because they were concerned about Jira being able to scale effectively and provide the kind of reporting and analysis support they desired.

At that critical juncture, the stakeholder attended the Atlassian Team Tour in New York City and happened to sit next to members of the Cprime team. Cprime’s CEO, Zubin Irani, was speaking at the event along with a panel of Cprime experts. The stakeholder recalls the representatives of Cprime were “way beyond in terms of technical knowledge, business knowledge, and in discussion of how and why to use Jira.” The Stakeholder contacted Cprime the following day and discussed his concerns about scaling Jira with the consulting firm the organization was currently working with, and how the tool could satisfy the business teams’ requirements as well. He’d decided that Cprime’s clear domain expertise and experience working with larger companies was a vital piece of the puzzle. So, the organization began working with Cprime to start their agile transformation journey.

…But It Went Far Deeper Than That
Ricardo Villalba, Senior Managing Consultant, Rebecca Velasco, Principal Solutions Architect, and Tina Behers, Delivery Director – Business Agility, took on working directly with a key stakeholder and others in the organization. After discussing the current situation and the team’s optimal future state, it became clear that the company was really looking for far more than a new tool. With over 5,000 potential users distributed across multiple teams and locations, the organization was implementing several different agile methodologies concurrently. The partial buy-in for RTC from the larger user community engendered a “wild west” atmosphere.

The organization desperately needed a clear and simple roadmap to transition from their current state to a unified, and truly agile environment. And, to complicate matters even further, what would normally have taken a minimum of twelve months had to be completed in just six months so the organization would not be forced to renew their contract with IBM, and incur a significant expense.

The Solution
Over the course of several deep discussions, the Cprime team developed a clear strategy that would guide what they quickly realized was a true Agile transformation:

Developing an adaptable schema template for Jira that could be customized to bring together three different levels of detail into one cohesive platform to optimize the integration with Atlassian Jira Align (formerly AgileCraft).
Categorizing and prioritizing nearly 500 projects to promote the fastest, smoothest migration possible.
Leveraging those teams and individuals who were most enthusiastic and supportive of change to test and optimize the system, easing the adjustment period for those who were less enthusiastic.
Run (essentially) three simultaneous agile transformations across the organization to coach and educate teams to run basic Scrum, Essential SAFe, and the Full SAFe Stack using Jira for Scrum, Jira at Scale (with Jira Align), and Jira Kanban as appropriate.
While complex and daunting on paper, implementing this solution across such a large and diverse organization within a tight timeframe was incredibly challenging.



The Template
“The Jira template is magic.” the Stakeholder said, “It isn’t Jira that was magic; it’s what you did with Jira.”

The Jira template Cprime developed incorporated those portions of the core Jira solutions needed by each business group while cordoning off those portions that were unnecessary. It could be tweaked and customized by the various units to work optimally for their circumstances and workflow, while still maintaining the unifying platform at the bottom of the stack. The template was designed with the best practices for Jira use and considerations of how the Atlassian APIs work to maximize the needs of the development teams, like DevOps needs:

Eliminating unnecessary customizations for business reporting needs (i.e. Financial information, shared projects at the team level, etc.).
 Allowing that information to be sourced in Jira Align where the connection to Strategy can be viewed and reported on for value realization, budgets, costs, completion, and status of portfolio epics.
As a result, all business units could be onboarded and trained in roughly the same way. And, having all business units on the same platform opened up reporting functionality that had never existed before. The addition of Jira Align was particularly a game-changer that the organization fell in love with:


Project Categorization and Prioritization
With nearly 500 projects spread across over 700 development teams and over 5,000 developers company-wide, there was going to be no way to migrate everything from RTC to Jira at once without creating utter chaos. To resolve this issue, Cprime facilitated multiple discussions with the Stakeholder and other transformation champions to come up with a list of attributes that could be used to effectively categorize and prioritize projects based on complexity and determined the best level of the integrated stack to be the new source of record for these key attributes. Regarding this process, the Stakeholder recalls, “We went through all the projects and prioritized them by complexity. So, we would batch the first ones that were simple and import those. And then we would hold a retrospective to find out what we did right and what we did wrong, how we could improve. Then, we fixed everything up and let those teams go to work. Then we grabbed the next batch. So, by taking this layered approach, we were eventually able to automate the process. It was very smart and very discreet.”

The more complex a project, the later it would be migrated over to Jira to allow for as much preparation, testing, and developer training as possible. Meanwhile, the simplest projects could be migrated early on, allowing for early adopters to begin working in Jira using the newly designed template and building a practical foundation of success on which to build later migration efforts. This approach allowed the organization to unify teams into trains and move groups of projects rather than individual teams to Jira and integrate with Jira Align to start pushing visibility up in the organization.

Leveraging Early Adopters
As is almost always the case with tool adoptions and agile transformations of all shapes and sizes, there were team members who were enthusiastic about the change, and those who weren’t. A key part of the strategy, in this case, was to enlist a small but vocal group of early adopters as ambassadors to help boost cooperation early in the transformation. One of the factors that made this strategy so successful was the greater-than-average level of buy-in the organization’s leadership brought to the table. From the top down, executives and managers across development teams were heavily invested in the program from the start. This was instrumental in getting the word out early and often, which in turn boosted the level of trust across teams, and eventually, the rate of adoption and success of onboarding.

Three Simultaneous Transformations
Finally, with early adopters and the organization’s leadership leading the charge, the customizable Jira template, associated software, and Jira Align were implemented in a quick but controlled migration. At the same time, developers across the organization were onboarded, trained, and coached for success in one of three variations on the SAFe/Agile theme. As all aspects of this strategy moved forward — sometimes in parallel, sometimes in sequence — it was absolutely vital for the Cprime team to build and maintain trust quickly and effectively.



Listening – There were ongoing opportunities to hear feedback from leadership and team members across the organization. The organization has long encouraged a culture in which everyone gets their say, and it was important for Cprime to instantly fit into that culture and hear out even aggressive and challenging voices.

Over-communicating – At the same time, Tina, Rebecca, and Ricardo needed to establish opportunities to get their own messages across as well. This translated into an intense schedule of stand-ups (held via video conference), training lectures, coaching sessions, and weekly demos with the diverse and often remotely-located teams. This continued post-migration with regular “office hours” that allowed project owners to ask questions and get help as needed.
 Showing them the future – Especially as the earliest projects started being migrated to Jira, and with the help of the ambassadors identified at the outset, every opportunity was taken to document early successes and use them to illustrate what the eventual outcome could be for everyone involved.
“Moving At the Speed of Trust”
Looking back at this tremendous undertaking, the level of success is even more impressive. The clearest underlying theme that carries throughout is trust:

The organization’s trust in Cprime’s expertise and ability to scale to meet their needs
The organization’s leadership team’s trust in Tina, Rebecca, Ricardo, and the other Cprime consultants who were steering the project
The trust that needed to be quickly and effectively developed with hesitant developers who tended to cling to the status quo
Trust that needed functionality of long-held tools could and would be available within Jira Align and Jira to escalate SAFe adoption and best practice adoption.
The whole organization’s trust that the “end” of this journey would more than justify the means
Trust in Cprime’s ability to help stand up a volunteer Community of Practice (COP) to continue fostering ongoing agile standards and best practices across the organization to promote Business Agility.


He went on to explain, “What’s beautiful about it is the community. Now, suddenly when team members talk, they’re realizing that we have fiduciary responsibility for everything we do beyond the coding. But they even talk about the template in terms of value and money. So, we have a COP now that’s volunteer.” Highlighting the impact of the custom Jira template Cprime helped develop, the Stakeholder notes, “Once you get the template, you get it. They see the value when a new team or team member comes on, training is so much simpler. Our teams have become more cross-functional and nimble because it’s essentially the same template on every team. So, they’re not fighting the tools anymore.”

Cprime and the organization developed an excellent working relationship and rapport that’s survived the official end of this engagement. As one of the key stakeholders describes it, “So as far as I’m concerned, Cprime hasn’t left because Tina, Rebecca, and Ricardo still ping me off and on. They still help me when I need something, I still have questions at times, and they always respond promptly. So, as far as I’m concerned, (Cprime) is like family.”














Case Strudy #78

Company Details
Industry: Manufacturer of Analytical, Diagnostic and Laboratory Equipment
Company Size: 50,000 Employees
Location: MA, US
Cprime Services:
Agile for Hardware Consulting
Executive Summary
The world’s largest maker of analytical, diagnostic and laboratory equipment was looking to try Scrum in a hardware environment, something that had never been tried, particularly when the goal was not a prototype but a fully developed, salable product. With the help of Cprime consultants, they implemented an Agile for Hardware pilot program that has yielded excellent results.


  
Overview
The world’s largest maker of analytical, diagnostic and laboratory equipment, Thermo Fisher Scientific has revenues of $17.5 billion a year and employs 50,000 people spread across 50 countries. The project in question took place in the company’s San Jose, California, office after employees there heard positive comments about some Agile experimentation taking place in the company’s office in Bremen, Germany. “We decided to try it here to see if we could get similar results, such as increased transparency of project status and improved collaboration between marketing and R&D and among different technical functions,” says Senior Manager Marisa Richardson. “We also needed a project management process that was acceptable in a regulated industry.” With her background in Lean and Operational Excellence, Richardson said she felt Scrum offered a nice framework for defining and monitoring the work of a complex, multidisciplinary project. “I was also interested in a process that would bring more visual management to how projects were led.

The Problem
Scrum in a Hardware Environment
Thermo Fisher was familiar with Scrum, having used it in software, but no one, to the knowledge of either Thermo Fisher or Cprime, had tried Scrum in a strictly hardware environment — particularly when the goal was not a prototype but a fully developed, saleable product. “There was no obvious history to point to of anyone who was already doing this successfully,” says Cprime’s Agile Practice Lead Kevin Thompson, PhD, PMP®, CSP®, who led the project.

And Cprime, Thompson is quick to point out, hadn’t done it either. However, Thompson was an obvious person to lead the project, having written a paper, “Agile Processes for Hardware Development,” in which he argued that a Scrum process should be effective for development of electronic and electromechanical devices.



 

How Scrum is different in Hardware
What makes the implementation of daily working Scrum so different in a hardware environment? You might better ask what isn’t different, says Thompson. To start with, software development typically proceeds at a fairly rapid pace and is broken down into separate steps or iterations, while it might take three to six months to get to a working hardware component or feature. More specifically:

1. It’s not Easy to add Functionality Over Time.

In traditional Scrum, features and functionality are added as you go along, but hardware is set from beginning. “You design the entire system to do certain things and then you build components to fit that plan,” says Thompson. Because hardware is developed according to strict process models and has to meet specific compliance standards, it’s much harder to make changes, particularly late in the process. When late changes do have to be made, the costs can run high.

2. You Can’t Test in the Middle.

In traditional Scrum, the team tests product iterations, then makes usability modifications accordingly, without altering the flow of execution. But with hardware, it’s not possible to test before all the components are assembled. “Take a car, for example — you can’t drive it when all you’ve got are tires and a drivetrain,” says Thompson. “You’ve got to put an awful lot of this stuff together before you can check capabilities, so that [checking] happens much later than in the software world.”

3. Everyone is Learning a New Language.

It wasn’t just the hardware developers who were learning a new language in being introduced to Scrum. Thompson realized he too needed to listen and learn. “They didn’t know how to do Scrum, but they did know how to design equipment,” Thompson says. So he started by listening in team meetings and learning how the current process worked. “A hardware team talks about pieces of equipment, they don’t think in terms of functionality. So I said, “Let’s divide up the world your way, and go with how you think about all this.”

The Solution
How Did They do it?
In many ways, Cprime’s work with Thermo Fisher Scientific followed the same process as any other type of Scrum training. The primary differences were the environment, the deliverables, and the fact that the team members, all hardware engineers, had zero experience with Scrum.

Choosing the Team.

Given the pioneering nature of the effort, it was important that everyone involved understood that the project would involve significant challenges, says Thompson. “While Cprime has enormous experience working with a variety of clients, Agile hardware development is new.” Even more critical, managers chose members of the nine-person team carefully, looking for innovators who had good tolerance for risk and mistakes.

Making the Plan.

To ensure the greatest chance of success, Thompson advised Thermo Fisher to choose for the pilot a medium-sized project that was important to the company, but the success of which was “not a life-or-death matter.” They chose a new product known as “Trailblazer” that met these criteria and launched in late July 2015.

Setting a Schedule.

Week 1: Scrum training and writing high-level requirements (epics)
Week 2: Drafting the release plan, including setting estimates for all epics, writing user and technical stories in preparation for Sprint 1
Week 3 (first week of Sprint 1): Sprint planning , developing and testing deliverables
Week 4 (second week of Sprint 1): Developing and testing deliverables.
Defining a Release Cycle.

Thermo Fisher defined the product life cycle in three phases: engineering prototype, manufacturing prototype, and final design. After consideration, Thompson and the team decided it made the most sense to map release cycles exactly to the three main design iterations. Thus the first release cycle was to design a working engineering prototype. The team estimated the full period necessary for the project at 15 sprints, or 30 weeks, or about 7 months.

Lessons Learned: What Worked and What Didn’t?
At first, as the team began Scrum training, “there was a fair amount of bafflement and amusement,” Thompson says, at this completely different way of working from their previous Waterfall-style project management. But quite quickly things began to come together. Here are the most important lessons Thompson learned about how a typical Scrum process works in a hardware environment.

Lesson #1:

The product owner is also a team member. In software development, product owners tend not to be software developers but to be product managers focused on market and business needs. But in hardware, the people who drive the definition of hardware products will usually be those participating in the development process.

Lesson #2:

Writing hardware requirements is a different process. To break down a project into specifications and deliverables, it’s necessary to cover all aspects of the product as currently understood. In software, a typical process would be to define the major user-facing areas of functionality that were important for the first (or next) product release, and write specifications for them. But in hardware, the focus is on what the product does and the components necessary to achieve that successfully. This meant that few of the deliverables reflected user experience, and most deliverables were behind the scenes. In Scrum language, there were lots of technical stories and relatively few user stories.

Lesson #3:

Release planning is essential. In typical Scrum, the fundamental development cycle is the two- to three-week sprint, and the much longer time horizon of a release cycle may or may not be part of the process. But because the cost of change is so much higher in hardware development, and the time to usability is much longer, it became clear that release planning was required. Going forward, “we sensed that we need to do more release planning and project risk assessment at the beginning, to be able to give a more predictable overall schedule for the organization to plan by,” says Richardson.

Lesson #4:

Stories are tested by implementers. While in software, quality assurance specialists are generally tasked with software testing, hardware deliverables vary so widely (from, as in this case, the design of a circuit board to an actual device or piece of machinery) that developers are in most cases the only ones who understand them well enough to test them.

Lesson #5:

Time-based estimation works best. Traditional Scrum teams collaborate to estimate stories relative to each other, in story points. However, hardware development teams comprise a mix of such highly specialized skills that establishing story point norms as a group proved impossible. The team found time-based estimation much more successful and intuitive.

What Made This Experiment Successful
Taking the time to plan together allowed the team to communicate and collaborate better than ever before, everyone involved in the project agrees. “The process of planning went more smoothly, with fewer bumps than they were used to,” says Thompson. Now, adds Richardson,



Team member Michael W. Belford, a research and engineering scientist at Thermo Fisher, agrees, “I make technical decisions with more input from the team than in any other project that I have worked on,” says Bellford. “The daily stand-up is a lifesaver, as is the [visual task] board. I can quickly understand where we are and what needs to be done.”

Outcome measures were another area where results were almost immediately apparent. “The first sign this was a success was that the burn-down chart was eerily on target; the tracking records showed we were exactly on plan,” says Thompson. Both team members and managers appreciated the resulting improvements in predictability.

Scrum has also increased team members’ ability to see the larger picture. “Release planning has been beneficial because it really focused the team on what our big goals are, as opposed to smaller engineering goals,” Belford says. Even what had seemed to be a problem has benefits, says Belford.

“Grooming is a hassle because it takes so much time and requires us to stop doing and think, but the drawbacks I mention are also the clear benefits.”

Thompson emphasizes that one of the most important aspects of the process is that it was clearly defined and purely Scrum, not something Agile but less defined. “I’d say that if we broke ground here, it was in creating a standard way to use Scrum for hardware development. All the i’s are dotted, and the t’s are crossed. It isn’t a one-off custom solution, but a fully reusable standard that I’m now using with other hardware clients.”

The Results
What Happens Next?
Currently the pilot project is still going strong at Thermo Fisher, with the nine-person team continuing to “push the envelope” in exploring the application of Agile to hardware.

Considering it an experiment in progress, Thermo Fisher Scientific isn’t ready to draw any specific conclusions yet. Still, the company hopes to expand the process to other teams and projects. “We would like to experiment with a bigger project, a distributed team, and continue to evolve with these variables,” says Richardson. “There are a lot of parallels with Lean, and we’ve seen Lean adopted outside of the automotive and manufacturing sectors to many different industries, such as health care and the military. It definitely makes sense that similar trends could happen with Scrum.”

Meanwhile, as word spreads, Thompson says he’s seeing a great deal of curiosity among those in hardware, and several clients have approached him about starting projects of their own. In particular, companies that use Scrum for software are interested in expanding it to hardware with the expectation that it would improve coordination between the two, says Thompson.

“Any time you’re building a product and your software and hardware need to get along, then the people who build them need to get along, and now you’re going down the path towards Scrum.”










Case Study #79

Company Details
Industry: Aerospace
Company Size: 20
Location: CA, US
Products: Identifying Fugitive Methane, or Natural Gas Emissions, Environmental Benefits
Cprime Services:
Jira Software Services
Executive Summary
Need for an internal system that could effectively track all ongoing issues and give the team insight into potential future threats. To avoid opportunities for exploitation the Kairos team settled on Atlassian Jira Software. With the help of Cprime Atlassian tooling specialists, the company implemented Jira and saw a significant drop in operating costs while seeing improved productivity and performance.


  
Overview
What Does Kairos Do?
Steve Deiker and Brian Jones developed the prototype hardware and software that became LeakSurveyor™, the company’s patented data collection, and analysis system. Since those early days, the expanded Kairos team of engineers and data scientists launched the system and continues to refine it.

The technology is cutting edge and the value is clear from scientific, environmental, and commercial perspectives. In order to deploy the technology as quickly and flexibly as possible, the airborne imaging hardware is custom-fitted to lightweight Cessna aircraft — the most common plane in the world and readily available for lease — allowing for efficient scanning of 50 to 100 square miles for methane leaks per flight. Compared to the three or four square miles a drone can cover, this unconventional approach for the 21st century results in strong returns for companies that leverage the Kairos approach.

In order to help its oil and natural gas industry clients unlock the value of rapid methane identification, Kairos was faced with the challenge of processing enormous amounts of data at a speed that works for industry, and not research. In order to help its oil and natural gas industry customers unlock the value of rapid methane identification. “We need to process huge amounts of data quickly,” Deiker explains, “in order to effectively find, measure, and prioritize the most important leaks quickly enough to make a difference.” That’s not just a matter of saving money, because these leaks can represent health risks as well. If the team identifies a dangerous leak near homes or schools, “we pick up the phone and call the operator immediately, whether they’re a customer or not,” because every hour counts.



The Solution
The Cost of Pushing the Envelope
Kairos Aerospace relies on a highly-automated cloud-based data analysis pipeline built around Amazon Web Services, Airflow cloud orchestration, tied together with custom Python code. Speed and accuracy are paramount, so the system is kept as lean and agile as possible.

“We run very lean,” Brian Jones, “and tend to rely on a few highly skilled engineers.” But, at the same time, there is a tremendous amount of data coming in consistently, day after day.

“With multiple flights per day, an automated data analysis pipeline, a stage of human data analysis, and an asynchronous reporting cadence, the hardest thing was just knowing the current status of all the data was.”
Innovative technology:

Kairos Aerospace has developed and patented an innovative, airborne, spectrometer-based methane detection system called LeakSurveyor™ that can detect methane leaks (among other things) from 3000 feet in the air.
A well-honed, proprietary data analysis pipeline serves up actionable insights from the data collected by LeakSurveyor™.
The result is faster, more accurate identification and analysis of potentially dangerous and costly gas leaks than ever before. This technology saves time, money, and lives.
With a quickly expanding client list and ambitious projects in the works, the Kairos team recognized that their internal processes needed to adjust to keep pace with the ballooning volume of data without sacrificing efficiency or value.

“We needed a scalable way to track our flights, datasets, and reports, so we could make sure nothing fell through the cracks,” Brian Jones explains, “not to mention costs — weather, hardware problems, and personnel availability can all impact our ability to operate, so we needed to be able to track all of that.”

Kairos: (noun) The opportune time to take action; awareness of the circumstances that open moments of opportunity”

The Greek word kairos can be translated, “the opportune time to take action.” The team at Kairos Aerospace has certainly taken action at the right time in the development, launch, and growth of their specialized sensing solution. And now, with challenges mounting behind the scenes, they again chose the opportune time to act by reaching out to Cprime.

The Opportune Time to Act
Recognizing the need for an internal system that could effectively track all ongoing issues and give the team insight into potential future threats to avoid and opportunities to exploit, the Kairos team did their research and settled on Atlassian’s Jira Software.

As one of the leading issue tracking solutions on the market, Jira Cloud was a natural choice. Even more than its core tracking functionality, however, the team decided to move forward with Jira because of its flexibility and the opportunity to create seamless integrations with the rest of their established tech stack.

But, with the lean engineering team at Kairos already stretched to meet their growing demand, tackling a complex implementation and integration project could have turned into a costly, laborious process. To avoid those issues and ensure they started building ROI from Jira immediately, Kairos Aerospace turned to Cprime.



Real-world impact:

In 2019 alone, Kairos Aerospace technology prevented over 3.9 billion cubic feet of methane from entering the atmosphere. Environmentally, that’s the equivalent of 425,585 cars coming off the road.
Leaks identified by LeakSurveyor™ in 2019 saved their clients over $3 million and reduced methane emissions by over 40 percent.
To accomplish all this, Kairos sensors spent 941 hours in the air and flew 135,360 miles.
Of the 20 team members that make up Kairos Aerospace, 18 of them would routinely need to work with the Jira system in one way or another. So, this was an all-hands-on-deck undertaking for the Kairos team.

Ari Gesher describes the process Cprime followed: “We had some video calls where we talked through our real-world processes. We’d done quite a bit of work internally to analyze and document our processes, so that helped move things along nicely. Cprime proposed a structure for Jira projects and workflows to perfectly complement our internal processes, and then led the Jira implementation with those workflows at the center.”

Of course, a successful solution implementation is just the beginning of the journey. After creating and implementing the custom workflows, the team from Cprime kept in close contact with the Kairos team. “Cprime helped us troubleshoot and refine our workflows as we put them to use. Some of our people are quite Jira-savvy while others were brand new, so it took some time to really get each flow where it needed to be.”

Additionally, the Cprime team created a webhook that allowed the Kairos engineers to start integrating Jira with the cloud-based data pipeline and other software they relied on. With that assistance as a solid jumping-off point, the Kairos team has since set up a number of useful omnidirectional integrations and automations that have truly embedded Jira into the heart of their tech stack.

Summing up the entire implementation and integration process, said Brian Jones. “We learned a ton from it. Now, our engineers are confident working with Jira and they’ll be able to adjust or create new workflows as the need arises in the future.”

The Results
Getting a Handle on Data
The ultimate goal of the project was clearly achieved.

“Our tech people can now easily get a handle on the status of all our flights and data. Additionally, it’s much easier to find relevant paperwork for a job because everything lives in the Jira ticket.”

An added bonus came to light shortly after implementation. “I was surprised at how much our non-technical people have embraced the system, especially in Finance. They had to climb a learning curve, but the quality of the information design means they can get answers quickly when they need it, and they really appreciate that.”

There were more quantifiable results as well.



By taking advantage of the opportune time to act — partnering with the professionals at Cprime — Kairos Aerospace was able to streamline and optimize their internal processes and significantly reduce operational costs. Most importantly, they’re now able to focus, once again, on their main mission of helping companies turn data into positive change. But now, they can do so at a much larger scale.











Case Study #80

Company Details
Industry: Software
Company Size: 1,000 Employees
Location: CA, US
Cprime Services:
AWS Well Architectured Review
Executive Summary
Tricentis Flood needed to achieve SOC 2 compliance as a service provider. In preparation for this upcoming audit, they wanted to review their existing practices to make sure they were up to practice standards. Cprime's cloud specialists ran an AWS Well Architectured Review to ensure optimal performance and security.


  
The Overview
Tricentis Leverages Cprime’s AWS Expertise to Achieve SOC 2 Compliance
About Tricentis Flood:

Tricentis Flood is a distributed, cloud load testing platform that helps teams test, analyze and improve the way their applications scale — with seamless integration across the DevOps pipeline. With Tricentis, you can achieve a continuous view of application performance and go live with confidence.

Tricentis adopted Cprime’s recommendations for performance improvements, including the following AWS Services:

Threat Detection: AWS GuardDuty – Ensures threat detection by continuously monitoring for malicious activity and unauthorized behavior.

Traceability: VPC Flow Logs – Provides traceability of network traffic within AWS Virtual Private Clouds.

Reliability: Application Load Balancers and Autoscaling Groups – Distributes traffic across multiple AWS availability zones to increase reliability and fault tolerance.

Disaster Recovery: Amazon S3 – Object storage with replication across regions to ensure disaster recovery.

Secure User Access: IAM – Manages user access credentials and programmatic access keys to AWS services.



The Challenge
Conducting a Technical Analysis for Guidance
As a service provider, Tricentis Flood needed to achieve SOC 2 compliance. In preparation for a SOC 2 audit, Tricentis wanted to review their existing practices and proactively apply necessary remediations. Beyond SOC 2 compliance preparation, Tricentis also desired a review of their Flood workload implementation relative to AWS architecture best practices.

The Solution
Identifying & Implemeneting Improvements
Cprime conducted an AWS Well-Architected Review on the Tricentis Flood workload. This involved a technical analysis of the Flood AWS implementation followed by a structured consulting session with Tricentis technical and business stakeholders. Out of the review, Cprime identified a number of improvements in the areas of security, reliability, and operations. Tricentis immediately implemented many of the recommendations.

The Benefits
As a result of the Well-Architected Review and guidance provided by Cprime, Tricentis Flood achieved the following benefits in its architecture:

Improved Security Protection Against Potential Threats
The addition of intrusion detection and detailed network logging provides greater threat protection as well as enhanced forensic capability in the event of a security incident

High Availability in the Face of Data Center Outages
The distribution of compute and storage across AWS availability zones and regions ensures system availability in the event an AWS data center or region becomes disabled.

Reduced Exposure to Potential Compromised Security
Tightened controls on access credentials and stricter network configuration reduces points of potential exploit by security threats.











Case Study #81

Company Details
Industry: Manufacturing
Company Size: 2,000 Employees
Location: MO, US
Cprime Services:
Managed Hosting Services
Atlassian Services
Executive Summary
Due to significant growth in Atlassian usage, Watlow's Atlassian Cloud-hosted instance ran up against storage and security limitations. With the help of Cprime's AWS migration experts, Watlow moved to AWS to enjoy greater productivity, scalability, and security.


  
About Watlow
Watlow designs and manufactures industrial heaters, temperature sensors, controllers, and supporting software as well as assemblies – all of the components of a thermal system. Since 1922, Watlow has served a variety of industries:
semiconductor processing, environmental chambers, energy processes, diesel emissions, medical and food service equipment. Headquartered in St. Louis, MO, Watlow employs 2,000 employees in 9 manufacturing facilities and 3 technology centers in the United States, Mexico, Europe, and Asia.

Overview
The Challenge
Due to significant growth in Atlassian usage, Watlow’s Atlassian Cloud-hosted instance ran up against space and storage limitations. In addition, Atlassian Cloud did not provide encrypted static storage which was required by Watlow’s security requirements.

The Solution
Watlow migrated their Atlassian tool suite to Cprime’s managed hosting service due to space/storage limitations imposed on Atlassian’s cloud-based instances. The migration allowed a more desirable security solution of encrypted static storage (which was not supported by Atlassian at the time).

The Results
Flexibility to Meet Customer’s Future Growth
With Cprime’s Managed Hosting (powered by AWS), Watlow has infrastructure that can scale seamlessly as the business continues to grow.

Security Solution to Meet Customer’s Requirements
With Cprime’s Managed Hosting (powered by AWS), Watlow can take advantage of the Encryption at rest and in-transit security services available on AWS.

IT Resource Allocation to Value-Added Activities
With Cprime’s Managed Hosting (powered by AWS), Watlow can deploy IT resources to value-added activities rather than Infrastructure operations and maintenance.








Case Study #82

Company Details
Industry: Financial Services
Company Size: 250 Employees
Location: CA, US
Cprime Services:
Agile Services
Test Driven Development Workshop
Behavior Driven Development
Executive Summary
The turbulent environment in the mortgage industry continues to challenge mortgage lenders and servicers alike. Complex, inflexible and costly-to-maintain legacy systems struggle to keep up with the frantic pace of changing regulations, technology advancements, investor guidelines and customer expectations. With the help of Cprime Agile consultants and development trainers, the company improved their test coverage and story acceptance rate significantly.


  

Overview
National Mortgage Insurance (National MI) is a private mortgage insurance company that enables borrowers with low down payments to realize homeownership, while protecting lenders and investors against losses related to borrower default. National MI moves MI forward to support the needs of an evolving mortgage industry.

The turbulent environment in the mortgage industry continues to challenge mortgage lenders and servicers alike. Complex, inflexible and costly-to-maintain legacy systems struggle to keep up with the frantic pace of changing regulations, technology advancements, investor guidelines and customer expectations.



The Challenge
Enabling Faster Delivery of Applications
National MI considered test and behavioral driven development to enable faster delivery of applications, while ensuring a high degree of quality. Test driven development (TDD) provides a path to build automated tests, thereby providing high test coverage. Behavioral tests capture end-user scenarios and help to build realistic end-to-end tests.

TDD is based on a simple idea: write a failing test before you write production code itself. It is an established technique for delivering better software faster and in a sustainable manner over time.

National MI started exploring the idea of implementing TDD when they launched a new project. The organization was looking to upgrade an in-house platform for mortgage insurance solutions. They were using a collection of different web applications and needed to build out this new additional piece at a rapid pace to meet customer demands. National MI understood they needed to adopt agile technical practices from the outset. This new application was a customer-facing, business critical component that required modernizing the traditional look and feel as well as offering new features with a rich UX and that was also mobile-enabled.

The Plan
Slow and Steady Wins the Race
Although National MI had been using Agile in their organization for a few years already, they had never implemented TDD and were excited to explore that methodology. The team started with organic adoption of test and behavior driven development as they explored the proof of concept and stepped up the effort with training and experimentation, which led to early success.

Initially, the project was launched as a proof of concept with a team consisting of:

1 Scrum Master
1 Developer
1 QA
1 Project Lead
Their initial feedback was to confirm that these techniques were very helpful to ensure high test coverage that allowed them to build cleaner interfaces.

Following these early successes, the PoC team decided to recommend and encourage broader adoption. They held a demo of the proof-of-concept and reviewed their conclusions with the larger development team. The team adopted TDD from the first sprint of the new project. Business analysts adopted BDD and started writing acceptance tests starting from the third sprint.

National MI engaged Cprime based on their proven expertise in agile development and consulting. Initially, the project started with Cprime providing expert trainers to train the developers on TDD. The initial positive impact of the TDD approach was such that soon enough, the BA’s learned of this success and expressed strong interest to adopt it themselves. National MI engaged Cprime to provide training to the Business Analysts. The training covered acceptance test writing, including suitable business test cases and test data as well as the process by which they are approved by business stakeholders.

The National MI team was very pleased with the Cprime training. They felt that the Cprime team showed a carefully balanced mix of technology and business expertise, which enabled them to blend, impart knowledge and get along well with the team.

The Results
Reducing Defect Rates Significantly
When National MI launched the TDD project, the teams expected potential delays. As they were adopting and implementing this methodology for the first time, Cprime experts supported the process and helped minimize the adverse effect on timelines and deliverables. Despite an initial learning curve, the team reported significant reductions in defect rates. The moderate cost increase in initial development effort was more than offset by a reduction in the timelines of the project’s later phases. Management understood the clear value generated by this effort and supported the team’s commitment to the practices. TDD also yielded a more sustainable codebase over the course of time that led to easier rollout of new enhancements as well as refactoring when needed.

This new way of working at National MI has strengthened the teamwork across the BA, Dev, QA, Product Managers, and UAT team members. National MI also achieved tangible improved time to market due to reduced time and effort needed to enhance the product.

With the continued success of this project, the team was keen to broaden the adoption and apply it to its core platform as well as to other applications within the organization.

Some of the Benefits: 

Achieved a code maintainability rating of A (highest rating achievable)
After 6 releases, technical debt dropped to 10 hours (based on the team’s past performance, their technical debt at this point would be measured in hundreds of hours)
Code quality increased dramatically
Test coverage of 92% (significantly high compared to industry standard)
% defects/KLOC: 0.2 (11/6000) – 0.2 ratio of defect per 1000 lines of code-a ratio of 1 is considered significant, so this was an exceptional improvement
Story acceptance rate is now 100% with timely acceptance – what previously took a week to complete was now achieved in a couple of days
TDD enabled the teams to write both module and integration tests
Integration with other pieces of the platform was improved
Responsiveness overall increased significantly
Due to the higher engagement of the business stakeholders, better match of expectations between business and IT
TDD encouraged improved collaboration between different stakeholders, while increasing automation, as well as the timeliness and quality of feedback. Overall, TDD allowed the National MI team to develop in a more consistent and predictable cadence, reduce time to market, adapt their software to the ever-changing business needs and ultimately – delight their users.

Cprime, as a trusted partner, was an integral part of the implementation. Cprime’s experts worked shoulder-to-shoulder with National MI management and practitioners to facilitate the successful adoption of these new sets of practices and processes, imparting knowledge and expertise to reduce potential friction and ensure that the tremendous potential benefits of TDD were achieved.











Case Study #83

Company Details
Industry: Information Technology
Company Size: 1,111 Employees
Location: VA, US
Cprime Services:
Jira Software Services
Confluence Services
Atlassian Consulting
Executive Summary
The Carfax delivery team doubled in just four years causing their work management issues to reach a tipping point. They needed a solution to help their organization to not only work faster but smarter as well. With the help of Cprime Atlassian tooling specialists, they were able to reduce platform downtime and save thousands of hours per year in improved productivity.


  
Overview
A Good Problem to Have
When the CARFAX Delivery Team doubled in just four years, the weaknesses in their work management system reached a tipping point. By migrating to Atlassian with the support of Cprime, they found a solution that has helped the entire organization work faster and smarter.

Challenges
Solutions That Are Seen all Over the Globe
From Missouri to Munich, consumers across the globe say, “Show me the CARFAX!” when they want vehicle history information. After all, CARFAX is the largest database of its kind in the world. However, many don’t realize that the company has expanded to offer additional products and services as part of its greater mission to provide trusted information that helps millions of people shop, buy, own, and sell used cars with more confidence.

To fuel this growth, CARFAX added over 100 new employees to their delivery team over the past four years – an increase of almost 50%. As the team grew, so did the demand for a more robust, integrated system to manage their products and people. They were using 3-6 different tools, none of which were connected to each other or well-aligned with CARFAX’s processes.

This multitude of tools resulted in a number of challenges: Product Managers and executives didn’t have visibility into portfolio-wide metrics, which made it harder to make educated business decisions. The technical and management metrics they did have were unreliable. Code repositories were scattered, leading to inconsistencies and inefficiencies. Plus, the fast growth and lack of governance over tools and processes were making the problems exponentially worse. At the same time, Director of Project Services Aaron Hall says the Project Management Office was experiencing cultural challenges and finding it difficult to demonstrate value.

Aaron and his team knew CARFAX needed to consolidate to one platform that would connect their departments and systems. The new solution also needed to add enough structure to ensure consistency, but not so much that it would hinder productivity or adoption. After partnering with enterprise agile and technology consulting firm, Cprime, and learning more about Atlassian, they knew they had found the ideal way to streamline their toolset and reach their goals.



A Collaborative Partnership to Build a Collaborative Toolset
While gathering platform suggestions from his team and exploring their options at tradeshows, Aaron noticed that Atlassian stood out. “Atlassian was a clear thought leader,” he explains. “Atlassian wasn’t just creating a single product and bolting other things onto it. They were looking holistically at culture, cohesion, and how people work.” While many CARFAX team members were advocating for Atlassian, Aaron wanted to be sure it was the right choice for them and, even more importantly, enlist hands-on help with strategy and implementation. He started researching solution partners, and after vetting several firms, he landed on Cprime. He recalls, “They had the knowledge to guide us down the road, as well as the culture, services, and approach to make us successful. They also provided a dedicated, on-site consultant throughout implementation so we wouldn’t be on our own.” Cprime’s Vice President of Professional Services, Swati Jain, agrees that the partnership was a natural fit because CARFAX was looking for a solution, not just a tool. “We’re a solutions provider,” she says. “We wanted to fully understand CARFAX’s needs so we could architect, design, and implement a solution not only for today, but one that could also scale with their future grow.”

Working Side by Side for A Seamless Migration
Through dialogue with Cprime, CARFAX confirmed Atlassian was the right solution for their team. Cprime then rolled up their sleeves and got to work, focusing primarily on the transition to Jira since it was the most complex part of the project. The CARFAX Delivery Team had been using Mingle as their primary work management tool. To migrate to Jira, Cprime worked closely with CARFAX through a three-phase process, first completing a design assessment and due diligence; second, architecting and implementing the new solution (Jira and Confluence servers, hosted by AWS) that would mirror existing

processes in Mingle; and third, preparing CARFAX for the transition. Along the way, Cprime facilitated workshops and meetings with dozens of CARFAX teams to gather requirements, create a hosting strategy, plan and manage the migration, provide training, and support a smooth implementation.

As a result, Aaron and colleague Alison Clough, who managed the transition to Jira, say the rollout was even easier than expected. “It was a non-event,” Aaron says proudly. “Not based on luck, but based on having an outstanding platform and engagement with stakeholders, as opposed to saying, ‘Here it is. Use it.’”

While a 300% increase in the number of users and highly engaged and motivated teams are definitely a good ‘problem’ to have, CARFAX needed to ensure that this growth would not adversely affect Service Level Agreements and overall stakeholder expectations (with the largest vehicle history database in North America and connections to over 100,000 distinct data sources, scalability and growth were an ongoing concern for CARFAX).

CARFAX made a strategic decision to migrate and host their Atlassian solution on the AWS cloud. Migrating to AWS would provide CARFAX with uninterrupted scalability and elasticity that would be hard to match with an on-prem deployment. “Hardware upgrades with our prior platform involved significant internal and external resources, multiple environments, regular outages for users, etc. AWS was the clear leader,” Aaron Hall says. “We needed automatic scaling, reliability and a deployment that would align with our overall cloud strategy. AWS offered us that.”

CARFAX migrated Jira and Confluence to the AWS Cloud, running all application nodes on Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) in addition to a mix of AWS services including EBS, RDS, SES and Route53. CARFAX also took advantage of Amazon CloudWatch to monitor Jira RAM usage and bandwidth, to more easily optimize the application. The AWS deployment accommodates current volumes and would guarantee support for any future levels of growth in scale and business activity. Besides increased in overall reliability and reduction in infrastructure costs, CARFAX expects to redirect IT staff from infrastructure admin tasks to more pressing, core business activities.

Well-Planned, Well-Executed, Well-Received
microsoft teams

In the months following the transition to Atlassian, CARFAX has achieved all the results they hoped for and more. From day-to-day tactical improvements (like increasing efficiency and Atlassian Solution Partner Case Study Copyright © Cprime. All Rights Reserved. 4 better managing backlogs) to strategic organizational growth (like building transparency and visibility throughout the enterprise), Aaron describes the change as “seismic.”

Alison agrees, saying their team now lives in Jira day in and day out. “Jira is core to what we do. It’s how we get work done,” she explains. “What’s even better is that the developers don’t even know they’re enabling key management decisions. Jira is providing direct insights that are tactically serving developers, all the way up to management as they make decisions about where we invest time and resources.

Aaron adds that CARFAX executives not only rely on Atlassian data for strategic insights around team productivity, but also enjoy seeing real-time data. “Executives never signed in to our old system. Now, they actually want to sit down with me and look at Jira so they can see what’s happening in real time and filter down to specific problems that we never would have noticed before.”

The wide adoption of Atlassian tools is unlike anything CARFAX has ever experienced, thanks to internal advocacy, stakeholder involvement at every stage, proactive communication throughout the process, and hands-on training. Although huge upticks in usage like this typically cause system performance issues, Swati points out that CARFAX has seen the opposite thanks to Cprime’s help building a stable infrastructure. Despite a 300% increase in users, platform downtime has decreased by 79%, saving over 2,000 hours of productivity each year.

With happier, more efficient, more informed teams, CARFAX has seen double-digit revenue growth and close to 90% customer satisfaction for most products, while laying a strong foundation to scale in the future.

Confluence: A Suprise Success Story
While Aaron and Alison expected Jira to be well-received based on the groundswell of internal support and extensive planning, they were surprised by the equally warm reception to Confluence. Even though the focus of the migration was originally on Jira, Confluence has blossomed as a go-to collaboration tool, with almost the same number of users as Jira. Aaron explains, “We’ve used Confluence to automate processes that were either done manually or with outdated technology. Now, it’s not only in a more engaging format that increases readership, but the people who populate the content are ecstatic because it’s so much easier to use.”

The Results
A Successful Migration That’s Driving Meaningful Results
With invaluable support from Cprime, CARFAX has successfully completed the migration to Atlassian and experienced improvements enterprise-wide. From greater development efficiency for Engineering, to more regular updates and scalability without interruption for IT, to consistent and real-time analytics for the C-suite, staff across the organization can work faster and smarter than ever before.

These improvements have not only made a difference in employees’ day-to-day work, but also helped reinforce the Project Management Office’s value as part of a broader focus on the team’s competence and capability. “We’re pivoting to more of a hub-and-spoke model with our Product and Technology Teams, where they are embedded in the business,” Aaron describes. “The business leaders at CARFAX are looking to our team for people who can bridge the gap between Technology and Management. Atlassian’s solutions help us do that.” The team’s work has even earned them a PMO of the year nomination from PMNetwork.

For Aaron and Alison, that’s where Atlassian has made the biggest impact: breaking down barriers between teams and having access to real-time, portfolio-wide data for smarter decision-making. “The depth of Atlassian’s functionality and the breadth of business functions have been head and shoulders above the rest,” Aaron says. “But to me, the transparency and visibility have been the biggest wins.”








Case Study #84

Company Details
Industry: Hospitality
Company Size: $20B - 2,000+ Employees
Location: 384 Office Locations | 71 Cities | Headquarters in NY
Products: Atlassian Jira/Confluence & AWS
Cprime Services:
AWS Migrations
Atlassian Migrations and Upgrades
Executive Summary
For this rapidly expanding company, acquisitions and growth are the name of the game. The company onboards 250 new users every week and consequently needed an easy way to scale their existing Atlassian Stack, consisting of Jira and Confluence. With help from Cprime Atlassian migrations specialists, they now enjoy all the benefits of the cloud, including greater availability, productivity and standardization.


  
Overview
Many organization tout a migration to the Amazon Web Service (AWS) cloud platform as one of their main business/technology strategic objectives. The impetus is clear – a superior technology stack, the promise of increased and rapid innovation and competitive pricing with direct positive effect on the bottom line. Making the switch, however, especially for mission-critical applications, can introduce risk and at times seem overwhelming. Some of the inherent challenges and potential risks of migrating production systems to a new environment may include extended downtime, loss of data, integration challenges and overall stability. Coupled with a lack of in-house experience with AWS or managing production applications in a cloud environment, this migration seems fraught with challenges and potential pitfalls.

The Problem
For this rapidly expanding company, acquisitions and growth are the name of the game. The company onboards 250 new users every week and consequently needed an easy way to scale their existing Atlassian Stack, consisting of Jira and Confluence. The initial number of 500 users has rapidly grown tenfold to 5,000, introducing concerns about the resiliency and disaster-recovery capabilities of the company’s on-premise data center. Given this substantial growth, the company’s product and execution teams needed to ensure the scalability, elasticity and availability of their development environment. They sought to address this challenge by migrating their Atlassian Stack to a high availability environment in AWS.

This migration presented the company with an opportunity to overhaul its business processes. Among the benefits they hoped to achieve were:

Scalability
Governance for integrating new acquisitions into their instances
Increased development agility
Better access and availability for their employees
Built-in standardization
Streamlining
Introduction and implementation of best practices in using Jira/Confluence, thus saving on capital expenses
The company also planned to leverage additional Amazon AWS capabilities as many of their current applications were being migrated to AWS.

The Plan
The company approached Cprime for assistance with their migration to AWS. Cprime’s long time experience with AWS as a verified APN Consulting Partner combined with its track record and expertise in successful project completions across a wide range of clients and industries made for an easy decision. Cprime had already completed a number of successful projects with the company, and so were positioned as the partner of choice for this important strategic effort.


The project began with Cprime’s AWS migration experts reviewing critical data about the applications to be migrated. Cprime experts consulted with the company’s DevOps team to develop a detailed migration plan documenting the artifacts, architecture, timelines, dependencies, support and contingencies involved in migrating Jira and Confluence to AWS environment.

A team of 10 Cprime experts were quickly embedded with the company’s teams to complete the migration and helped with application level issues during the testing and production phase. In total, the migration included 6 separate instances: 3 for Jira and 3 for Confluence, on Dev, Test and Prod.

During the production migration, Cprime monitored system performance, helping users and answering questions and providing guidance when needed. Since going live, Cprime has migrated over 2 newly acquired companies for this customer and continues to provide admin and support services.

The Outcome
Results:
In the process of migrating its Atlassian stack to AWS, the company increased automation and standardization. The migration to this new cloud-based platform went so smoothly that employees never experienced any significant disruption with the only noticeable change being improvement of performance.

The Cprime expert team remains engaged and continuously monitors performance and provides assistance and recommendations

Throughout the engagement, the Cprime team transferred critical knowledge to the company’s teams, coaching them on both tools and processes to help ensure their ongoing success in independently managing their new AWS infrastructure and DevOps mode.

By all measures, the Jira and Confluence migration was a successful first step in the firm’s journey to create greater availability, productivity and standardization. As the company continues to grow, the migration to AWS is viewed as a strong foundation to the firm’s future IT initiatives.












Case Study #85

Company Details
Industry: Internet Software and Services
Company Size: 500+
Cprime Services:
Atlassian Jira Implementations, Consulting and Solutions
Executive Summary
This customer needed to consolidate their business processes across functional departments and decided to integrate their CRM and ALM systems in order to bridge Sales, Customer Support and Development. With the help of Cprime consultants and Atlassian tooling specialists, they were able to improve collaboration, productivity, and customer satisfaction, all while reducing costs.


  
Overview
This customer needed to consolidate their business processes across functional departments and decided to integrate their CRM and ALM systems in order to bridge Sales, Customer Support and Development together in a more cohesive way that simplified process, consolidated workflows and automated handoffs. The results enabled better enterprise collaboration and reduced manual duplicated effort.

The Problem
The customer needed a software and business process strategy considering they were leveraging various software vendors at different levels of the organization creating gaps that impacted customer happiness. The primary challenges encountered were that many of the systems did not

Have effective linkages between the work items; creating siloes of trapped information. Factor in horizontal collaboration that extended across departmental or functional boundaries; creating unnecessary meetings, duplication of work and ultimately more handoffs.
Provide status updates on work in process in a timely manner that satisfied customer expectations; an increase in manual and duplicated effort impacted delivery and communication back to customers impacted satisfaction.
Customer Support used Salesforce CRM and triaged customer support requests in the Cases object.
Customer Support would commonly escalate tickets to the Development team, who used Jira Software, creating delays and gaps of information on a large volume of tickets in the escalation stage. The
Customer Support team needed a way to integrate and transfer all the relevant customer specific context from a work item in Salesforce to a work item Jira for the Development team once an issue was escalated.
The Development team also needed a way to stay in sync with the Customer Support team regarding all comments, attachments and status updates in order to provide status updates and release targets.
Opportunity to improve business needs:
Simplify workflow inefficiencies. The Client needed to be able to move faster across departments or functional groups to enable better traceability of work items that cut across departments.
Escalate work in a more effective way. The Client needed to be able to break down the walls of manual process in order to enable more real-time context and better communication and collaboration of work items that happen at different times in a process and workflow.
Synchronize work items between two systems (Salesforce and Jira). Sought to be able to escalate, fast track and bi-directionally synchronize Jira and Salesforce fields, custom fields, status, comments, attachments.
The Plan
The organization called on Cprime to set up the following for success:



Streamlined integrated workflow across two systems and functional teams. Cprime implemented a plugin and automated workflows that bridged Salesforce, Jira Software in the Cloud, Customer Support and Development teams, reducing the need for department read out meetings and hundreds of hours of status reporting and reconciliation between two systems to report status back to stakeholders and customers.
Work item integration. The Cases object in Salesforce used a status trigger from Salesforce in order to automate the new or existing ticket creation inside of several different Jira Projects, allowing Customer Support to extend their workflow to automate the handoff and escalation to Developers in Jira in a synchronized fashion.
Metadata synchronization: Both teams were able to specify which fields from both systems were important and specified the direction of synchronization to keep all stakeholders informed. Selective Comments & Attachments allowed the Customer Support team to reduce meetings and keep the Developers and Customers informed in real-time.
Work items representation in both systems. Each team could stay in their tool of choice, and through an URL link, they were able to click and get the full context and insight on where a specific ticket was at in the workflow.
Results
Better Customer Satisfaction. Customers had real-time feedback on escalations and understood where their ticket was in the process. Resolution time increased by 50% as a result.
Simplified Workflow. Instead of having multiple workflows interact with the problem, Cprime devised one simplified horizontal use case that fused together Sales, Customer Support and Development that catered to all their work item needs as it related to their customer requests, increasing repeatability and scalability of their cross team handoffs.
Better Enterprise Collaboration. Real-time and historical comments, attachments, status and other system relevant fields were completely bridged across systems allowing the context at different stages to move along with the work, speeding up Development’s ability to understand the issue, requirements and deliver.
Productivity Increases. Automation of work between systems reduced manual reporting and time spent understanding the big picture.
Cost Savings: Less people needed to be a part of the process and handoffs and this became an automated rule vs someone’s job.








Case Study #86

Company Details
Industry: Insurance
Company Size: 5000+
Cprime Services:
Agile Training
Agile Coaching
Executive Summary
As the organization began to implement agile at scale, several challenges emerged, chief amongst them was knowledge management. With the help of Cprime trainers and coaches, they reduced the "noise" and are now able to focus on doing the right work in the right way.


  
Overview
In our competitive economy, organizations must have the ability to implement change and to quickly respond to market conditions to increase and preserve their advantages. Often, the ability to react quickly is hampered by the inability to efficiently communicate and disseminate direction/strategy and knowledge. To get the full return on their knowledge, organizations must harness effective change management strategies as well as embed knowledge sharing and collaboration in the organizational culture. Improving such capabilities can make a direct and significant contribution to an organization’s competitiveness.

In this spotlight, we focus on a large health insurance organization offering a wide range of commercial property and casualty insurance products to their members, with a strategic goal of becoming more responsive to customer and market needs. To achieve this goal, the organization began taking steps toward building an Agile workforce.

The Problem
As the organization began to implement agile at scale, several challenges emerged, chief amongst them was knowledge management. Disseminating the required knowledge to successfully implement agile processes, improve cross-team collaboration and apply agile principles in an optimal fashion proved to be a formidable obstacle.

To ensure a successful implementation of the agile Transformation, the team needed to:

Reduce time and effort spent in acquiring knowledge of process and methodology
Improve reusability (avoid “reinventing the wheel”)
Reduce dependency on individuals for project success
Improve overall team’s productivity
The Plan
As the organization embarked on their agile transformation, the Blue Agility coaching team introduced the teams to BlueKit, specifically for application to Scrum, Kanban, XP and SAFe frameworks. BlueKit is a library of best practices, templates, workshops, etc. designed to help drive consistency and accelerate adoption of agile/SAFe. BlueKit is built from actual successful implementations and helps form the foundation for how to execute practices within the transformation. It enables sustainability of the Agile effort over the long term and organizational consistency and self-sufficiency.



Through the use of BlueKit, Blue Agility setup the following for success by helping the client Transformation Team:

Understand each framework
Present the workshops and techniques in a self-sufficient manner to reduce dependency on BA Coaches
Understand the layout of the BlueKit
Re-engineer the BlueKit to fit specific organizational processes
Add and edit material based on customer needs and requirements
Results
Through the application of BlueKit, each member on the transformation team gained knowledge on:

The location of the relevant reference material, including practical techniques and best practices for specific activities
How to customize and deliver agile workshops
How to harvest and enhance the repository of shared knowledge and best practices to further enhance organizational capabilities.
The strategy employed was to develop a pool of internal Agile coaches (BlueKit Transformation Team) who would then engage with the teams to help in their development and adoption of Agile and specific frameworks that the teams would be involved in implementing. Initially, this Transformation Team had no prior Agile background but were quickly able to understand and successfully deliver the material while continuously updating their knowledge as they evolve in their agile journey. The Transformation Team felt confident in absorbing the material and delivering it themselves within a span of 2 months from inception of BlueKit usage. They also delivered several workshops with good results.

BlueKit users commented that they felt less overwhelmed with the “noise” of content on the Internet. They were able to focus on building upon what was available to them on the BlueKit, rather than searching, questioning and haphazardly customizing to their organizational needs. Blue Agility coaches were engaged in guiding them on the use of the content for their specific goals.

The specific framework knowledge of an organization, including its nuances and customizations, is considered to be an important intellectual capital, and therefore must be managed efficiently, ensuring its preservation and enabling its constant evolution to empower the teams to self-sufficiency.






Case Study #87

Company Details
Industry: Audio - Bluetooth & Wireless Headsets
Company Size: Generates close to $900 million in annual revenue
Location: Santa Cruz, California
Products: Agile for Hardware
Cprime Services:
Agile Hardware Product Development
Atlassian Implementation
Executive Summary
With the shifting deadlines, changing priorities, and engineering unknowns that are common to any R&D department, a standardized but flexible process is critical to enabling team members to focus on design and engineering tasks. With the help of Cprime consultants and Atlassian tooling experts, they underwent an Agile for Hardware transformation resulting in greater efficiency, accountability, and predictability.


  
The Challenge
Plantronics is a 50-year-old audio innovation company that’s obsessed with removing the barriers to simple, clear communication. Best known for its Bluetooth headsets and wireless headphones, the Santa Cruz, Calif.-based company offers a range of wearable electronics products for unified and mobile communications, gaming, music and entertainment. Plantronics generates close to $900 million in annual revenue from enterprise and consumer customers.

Research and Development activities at the company range from delivering demos to open-ended research to form-factor proofs of technical concepts brought to life by a rapid prototyping process. Building proofs of concept involves developing hardware and writing firmware and software. The R&D team has the capability to design its own hardware or to use external vendors. Past projects from the team include Plantronics prototypes Wearable Concept 1 and Wearable Concept 2, which are headsets embedded with numerous sensors for tracking head motion and orientation, including an accelerometer, a gyroscope, a magnetometer, and a compass. The devices also feature a pedometer, freefall detection, an MFI chip for IOS integration and a suite of APIs for integrating with Android, Mac and Windows.

With the shifting deadlines, changing priorities, and engineering unknowns that are common to any R&D department, a standardized but flexible process is critical to enabling team members to focus on design and engineering tasks. In 2016, leadership changes led to an opportunity to fine tune the company’s R&D processes. Portfolio Manager Paige Fordice and R&D Technical Manager Catelyn Orsini set out to adopt an Agile practice to bring structure to their team’s work.

The Solution
Finding Cprime
The software development organization at Plantronics had already successfully adopted Agile. And, Orsini thought there was potential for Agile to work in a multi-disciplinary R&D setting. She said, “When I found the Certified Agile Hardware course, taught by Cprime’s Chief Scientist, Kevin Thompson, Ph.D., I thought it seemed promising.” She and Fordice enrolled. After they completed the Certified Agile Hardware Practitioner course, Dr. Thompson helped provide the information, answers, and materials needed to propose that Agile be adopted as the primary development methodology in the Plantronics R&D department. Following a Plantronics site visit to interview engineering team members and key stakeholders to consider their specific concerns and challenges, Thompson presented his assessment of the group’s needs. The Agile transformation kicked off with a February on-site training.

Tweaking Agile for Hardware
The “Scrum Framework” defines a planning horizon called a “Sprint,” in which a team starts and completes a set of deliverables whose details are written in a format known as “Stories.”

Like most companies, Plantronics selected a Sprint length of two weeks. Their Sprint Planning meeting ensured that the team could implement the most valuable things in the Sprint, which required assessing value, dependencies, and work that could be done by different people on the team throughout the Sprint.

The last point was of particular importance for this team, Fordice said. “We had to approach planning Sprints from an individual perspective, given that each team member had different skill sets.”

Thompson emphasized the importance of this difference between Agile for hardware and Agile for software. “In the software space, there’s the notion that everyone can do anything, so you don’t need to worry too much about who is doing what,” he said. “It’s not completely true, but it’s a lot closer to being true for software people than it is for hardware people. On a cross functional team of engineers, each member is more highly specialized than the members of a software development Scrum, so you need to make sure that you are mixing the loading of the skill set as well as the team as a whole. You need to ask, ‘Are we over- or under-loading someone who has a particular skill?’”

Another challenge in hardware development is that highly specialized professionals know more about the sizes of tasks than do other team members, so instead of a collective sizing process, the team required an individually driven sizing process.

Getting to the Sprint
Prior to the Scrum launch, another Cprime consultant helped the R&D team at Plantronics to set up Atlassian’s proprietary Jira project management software and Confluence team collaboration software to provide a repository for documentation. With those tools in place, the toughest part of setting up the team’s first Sprint was Story writing. Orsini said, “It’s one thing to learn in the training about how to write good Stories; it’s another thing to do it on a real R&D project already in flight.” Thompson came to the company’s headquarters to help the group navigate such sticky spots and share models of what they should look like ideally.

Once the Plantronics group had groomed and prepared a backlog with Thompson’s guidance, they met daily to go over progress. When it was time to end the first Sprint, Thompson came back to coach the group through review and retrospective meetings, starting another backlog, and kicking off another Sprint planning.

Overcoming Resistance
As the technical manager of a team of experts, Orsini knew there would be questions about the process, but said Agile inherently answers many of them. She said, “It was helpful to have a very detailed guidebook that anticipated and answered questions like, ‘What is each person’s role? What is every Scrum ceremony supposed to accomplish? From beginning to end, how long is everything supposed to take?’

“Our Research and Development team functions at the highest level in the industry,” said Cary Bran, Vice President of Strategy, Research and Development at Plantronics, “but any team should always take advantage of great tools, when they are available, to help them work as efficiently and effectively as possible. Our team’s adoption of Agile was a boost to their planning, prioritizing and efficiency efforts and we’re happy to be able to continue to utilize it.”

Fordice said it was useful to have Thompson on-site walking the team through the process and talking them through the tools and documentation. She added, “Once you get used to the rhythm or the cadence, it becomes a lot clearer and it also allows each team member to know what the other team members are doing.”

Atypically, the first Plantronics R&D Sprint began not at the launch of a new project but mid-project. Thompson helped the group resolve questions about shifting gears to Agile after a project was already underway. Estimating in R&D, where tasks can be more open-ended than concrete, can also present a challenge, Orsini said, but teams learned quickly, and more senior members with expertise in hardware, firmware, or software pitched in when there were questions about estimation or duration.

Progress
When Plantronics R&D was on Sprint 19, each Sprint had become easier, Orsini said. Daily meetings, improved structure and stricter discipline had enabled better processes.

Fordice added that Sprint planning had served to improve communication and organization while helping product owners set priorities and resist being sidetracked. Orsini said the new process also helped her manage resources and tasks performed outside of the R&D team — whether within the Plantronics organization, by contractors, or by external resources. “For example, we worked with an external company to build the circuit boards,” she said. “This process allows you to keep track of work even when it is outside of your organization.

The Results
For R&D, the benefits of adopting Agile are readily evident. “Overall, accountability has increased, we’re meeting our quarterly demo requirements, and we’re meeting all our key project deadlines,” Fordice said.

What’s more, Orsini said, overnight and weekend work has been eliminated. “Scrum training discourages a crunch-time work style,” both on the R&D team and among stakeholders. With more predictability, teams can better pace themselves and meet deadlines easily.

Sprint reviews are also useful when they reveal that things went off schedule; there are no surprises. “You know quickly, and you can manage expectations upwards, re-prioritize in real time, and adjust.”

Overall, Fordice and Orsini agreed that the new process enables the team to work at a steady pace with clear understanding of priorities and has improved collaboration among geographically distributed team members. Their Scrum journey has been successful enough that they continue to use Scrum one year later.










Case Study #88

Company Details
Industry: Online advertising technology
Company Size: 700+
Location: Ventura, California
Products: Atlassian Jira
Cprime Services:
Implementing Atlassian Jira Service Management
Executive Summary
For Client Services at The Trade Desk, their issues were critical: slow workflows and process management could not keep up with growth. Cprime completed a fast 120-day implementation of Atlassian Jira Service Management (JSM) to automate workflow and management processes, resulting in consistent process standards and high quality of service with increased efficiency and productivity.

The Trade Desk inc.
  
 

Overview
Founded in 2009, The Trade Desk is a leading platform for ad buyers to bid on and purchase digital ads using automated technology. Based in Ventura, California, the company has 20 office locations and customers that span the globe.

The Trade Desk has become the fastest-growing demand-side platform in the industry by offering advertising agencies, aggregators and their advertisers best-in-class technology to manage display, social, mobile and video advertising campaigns. The Trade Desk provides a self-service platform for ad buyers, who deliberately pick from hundreds of billions of digital ad opportunities each day.

Within a few years, the Trade Desk was experiencing hypergrowth. But with its success came operational challenges, and the company was unable to scale its systems to match the extreme growth rate. Through iterative organizational growth – typical for a fast-growing company – The Trade Desk was challenged with disparate systems and support processes.

There was no single location to see the entire picture related to a support issue. The Trade Desk’s engineering, development, product management, client-facing and support teams were each using different systems to manage workflows. For example, one team was using Desk.com, another Pivotal, while a third team continued to use Excel.

The entire company relied on email as the primary communication channel across the various teams. Email related requests had no clear accountability or ownership, and it was not uncommon to see many team members addressed or copied on an issue with no primary issue owner. This lack of automation, efficiency or collaboration in workflows and business processes inhibited The Trade Desk’s ability to scale and provide great customer service.

Challenges
The Client Services Department is the primary point of contact with The Trade Desk’s advertising agency customers. Client Services reps are account managers and traders in the field who interact with customers, working with them side-by-side each day. For Client Services their issues were critical: slow workflows and process management could not keep up with growth.

Client Services was also siloed. It had no direct connectivity to the Engineering & Development team, which handles its technical issues. If a Client Services rep needed to escalate an issue, they had to send an email to an address at the Engineering team with no way to track the message. Emails were often missed or dropped.

“As we started to expand rapidly, the tools that we were using started to break down. It became a situation where we had account managers duplicating effort, working on the same issue, but not necessarily coordinating or collaborating well,” said West.

“Our customers were not realizing the customer service they were looking for. Worse yet, some of them were not getting the answers they needed at all. At that time, our average internal customer satisfaction rating was sub 60 percent, which is totally unacceptable for our organization.”

“It was also adding friction to the growth we were experiencing. In some cases our product management teams were not even in the loop on trends that were occurring that might affect our platform.”

The breakdown occurred in three areas: First, there was fragmentation between development teams that used one system, and one or more support teams that used a different platform to manage tickets or requests.

Second, there was no traceability. No system was in place to track the status of each request, or who was in charge to provide an authoritative and timely update to a request. This was exacerbated because customer service reps were logging customer requests into a ticketing system that had no integrated connection to the backend development environment, where the Development team was making relevant upgrades.

Third, there was no analytics system in place. The Trade Desk is a data-driven company that uses automated technology systems to help its clients buy and place ads. Without analytics supporting the company’s internal systems, they were unable to anticipate or predict change or demand that could affect future growth. The Trade Desk wanted to continue on the hypergrowth curve, but in order to do that, management needed a way to make informed decisions based on data.

Choosing Cprime
These three problems motivated The Trade Desk to look at new systems and platforms including Jira Service Management. Drew West’s Global Support team recommended JSM as a potential workflow platform for front-end teams. They also looked at tools that could align with Engineering & Development. Global Support tested a variety of solutions and chose JSM and Jira software to close the alignment and collaboration gap.

The Trade Desk looked for a consulting partner that understood the Jira platform and could conform JSM to their unique needs. In addition, they wanted a partner that could provide strategic direction, and deploy the platform quickly.

The Trade Desk selected Cprime because of its expertise with the Atlassian Jira platform, its long experience with helping technology teams collaborate and iterate quickly in an Agile environment, and its proven ability to launch in a short time frame.

Cprime demonstrated the ability of JSM to scale for complex IT service management operations in a four-week proof of concept. This included a detailed discovery phase, followed by rapid prototyping and a demonstration of results. At the end of the four weeks, the consensus at The Trade Desk was to select JSM as the platform for all future service management operations, and for Cprime to implement it.

Client Services Solution
Cprime deployed Jira, JSM and Confluence to manage all Support operations at The Trade Desk. JSM brings every participant in a request into a central tool, where they can work together on a single version of the request. This eliminates organizational and process fragmentation, and gives managers vision into each service agent’s workflow.

All case communications are handled through JSM. Support ticketing and product management systems are seamlessly integrated. The ability to track the lifecycle of each request, and linked or related issues, vastly improves productivity and work quality.

In addition, JSM automates data collection and analysis. It automatically reports status, volume, types of requests and other data. With automated data mining, The Trade Desk can evaluate the highest volume case types that come into all support delivery teams, and the average time it takes to resolve a case.

“We were seeing 300 of a certain type of request come through our process every month, and because we now have traceability and visibility, we were able to say, ‘What if we added a feature to our platform that made it unnecessary for that request to come in anymore? The user of our platform could do it themselves’,” said West.

“We basically eliminated a recurring 300 cases every month, that I estimate took 300 hours. What would you do if you had 300 hours of employee time that you could reinvest? That’s a big value we’ve gotten out of JSM.”

Additional Features
Cprime brought a strategy to The Trade Desk to deploy workflow templates as part of the Jira Service Management implementation, so that business processes can easily scale as the company continues to experience hypergrowth. Cprime created a variety of JSM workflow templates for The Trade Desk to deploy whenever a new department is ready to migrate to the Jira platform.

The Development team can assess a team’s business needs and processes, look at what they’re currently using as a workflow, and choose the appropriate template for them. The deployment usually takes only a week when a department uses a workflow template that doesn’t need to be conformed.

Outcome
Cprime helped The Trade Desk build a connected service delivery team of over 150 service agents, and all 500+ employees are now active JSM participants. “Through rapid collaborative delivery, Cprime transformed our implementation into an enterprise platform that is continually being adopted and expanded today,” said Drew West.

“The rapid adoption and ongoing expansion of the Jira Service Management system has enabled us to establish consistent process standards and high quality of service, and to expand our efficiency and productivity.”










Case Study #89

Company Details
Industry: Healthcare equipment and services
Company Size: Fortune 500
Location: Santa Clara, California
Cprime Services:
Agile Transformation
Atlassian Jira Integration
Executive Summary
Agilent's Software & Informatics Division set a new priority: Improve the predictability of the group's performance. With the help of Cprime consultants and Atlassian tooling specialists, Agilent improved visibility, release speed, and predictability.


  
Overview
Agilent’s Software & Informatics Division set a new priority: Improve the predictability of the group’s performance.

The need was clear. At one meeting to review the readiness of software two months in advance of its release, the team discovered 185 points in a backlog that had not been put into the scope of work. The product, already more than a year in development, was delayed another 4 months. The case wasn’t an anomaly. The organization was meeting fewer than 20 percent of its release deadlines.
Agile_Facilitation_Small_black_coral
“We needed to change significantly the way various functional silos coordinated to build products,” says John Sadler, VP and General Manager of the division. He proposed an Agile transformation and green-lighted a coaching relationship with Cprime that included a JIRA project management software integration. One year later, when the division released next-generation software to support Agilent’s chromatography data systems, it was the first time anyone in the organization could remember delivering on schedule.

More Complicated Than Mobile Apps
Getting there was no small task. Agilent’s Software & Informatics Division includes 150 employees on two continents who collaborate with contractors on a third. Comprised of engineering, marketing, quality assurance, tech support, and sales professionals, the Division develops the tools that power Agilent hardware—state-of-the-art analytical instruments used in industries including pharmaceuticals, chemicals, energy, plastics, food, and environmental remediation.

Agilent’s customers in those regulated markets are required to validate each step of their process. They put new equipment into production over lengthy cycles, and carefully schedule downtime for software upgrades. Stefan Weiss, Integrating Manager at Agilent-Technologies in Waldbronn, Germany, explains, “We can’t update our software on a daily basis like mobile app companies can without the customer noticing. Our customers don’t like updates, they don’t like bugs, and the cost of validation is multiple the cost of an update.”

Indeed, the constraints of developing software for scientific analysis instrumentation would seem to contradict some of the principles of Agile development: Agilent ships machines on three-to-five year cycles to customers who expect to use them indefinitely; the company’s installed base is expansive, including some customers who maintain offline labs without access to downloads stored on the cloud; and because Agilent develops and delivers software on multiple continents, daily stand-ups—a mainstay of the Agile method—are impossible.

Still, an Agile approach was the best hope for improving predictability and transparency, as well as Agilent’s ability to win and retain business. “In order to mediate among all of the interests we serve, we had to be able to forecast with a reasonable degree of confidence how long it was going to take us to get things done,” says Sadler.

He proposed to his team an adapted version of the Agile Manifesto, with caveats:

Individual interactions beat processes and tools when individuals truly interact across functions on a daily basis (we can do this)
Working software is better than comprehensive documentation when the software is simple and non-technical (challenging for us)
Customer collaboration wins over contract negotiation when customers are available for frequent collaboration and we can tell objectively what works for them (we can use proxies, but must bear in mind that deployment cycles are long)
Responding to change beats following a plan when we have frequent customer interaction, objective feedback, and the ability to deploy on short cycles (remember those three-year instrument cycles?)
A Half-Hearted Agile Attempt
To be sure, parts of Agilent’s Software & Informatics Division had attempted to adopt Agile methods years earlier. But the effort had been less than thorough and inconsistent across the organization’s six collaborating software teams in Santa Clara, Waldbronn, and Grenoble, France. Several team members now acknowledge that, while they claimed they were doing Agile, the six teams used two incompatible work-tracking systems and each followed a different “Agile” approach. Agilent Software Project Manager Rajesh Parikh explains it this way: “We were using Agile, but not everyone was thinking Agile.”

To support a process overhaul, David Barber joined as Senior Director of R&D for Software & Informatics. A seasoned engineer whose qualifications included experience working with Agile pioneers Mike Cohn and Ken Schwaber, Barber was the outsider the company needed to rally a mindset shift.

Barber, in turn, chose Cprime to train and coach the Software & Informatics Division through a true Agile transformation. Of Cprime Agile Practice Lead Kevin Thompson, Barber says, “We’re aligned. There are different approaches to Agile, and Kevin has a pragmatic approach that says, ‘This is what works and this is how we do it.'”

“We needed to engage with someone who could provide that common level of training, understand our complexities, and be willing to take us on from an established company with enough rigor to train worldwide teams,” adds Agilent Project Manager Sonja Cuffe. “One thing we appreciated about Cprime and about Kevin in particular is that his thoughts and processes and approach to things doesn’t waiver. You can’t be too wishy washy in terms of describing the process when you’re dealing with a group of intelligent developers. A consultant should come in and say, ‘Hey, this is how we think it should be.’ It has been very beneficial having Kevin on board.”

Cprime’s JIRA expertise was also attractive to Agilent. The hardware maker had already decided to adopt the Atlassian project management tool, and would require a consultant to customize it. Cprime provided one-stop shopping. “JIRA offers by far the lowest initial cost of ownership among Agile product management tools, but it’s hard to configure and not useful straight out of the box,” Thompson says. “Agilent has people in California, Delaware, Germany, and France who need access to the same plans and information. They need a tool that can span the globe. JIRA is something they couldn’t do without, and we did the installation and training.”

A year after starting their Agile transformation process, Agilent team members describe various “before” and “after” scenarios that illustrate the dramatic change Cprime’s approach enabled:

Before:

Performance might be measured in engineering hours, or person days, or Story points.
After:

Everyone agrees on how to measure Velocity and Burndown.
Before:

Teams with different levels of Agile training had different definitions for Epics, Stories, and Subtasks.
After:

Everyone in the organization speaks the same language.
Before:

Scrum masters wrote code, led Team meetings, and weighed in on feature priorities.
After:

Scrum masters are task masters who report up to product managers.
Before:

Features with bugs could get approved, carrying defects into subsequent development phases.
After:

A universal definition of “done” ensures that bugs are eradicated before the next Sprint.
Before:

Problems often popped up at the final hour, causing panic and substantial delays.
After:

A shared set of tools used across all Teams prevents surprises and helps maintain focus.
Before:

There was no instrument for measuring a Team’s capacity to do work.
After:

There is agreement on how to predict and measure capacity on a daily basis.
Before:

Product teams burdened engineers with poorly written requirements.
After:

Engineers do not accept unclear requirements.
Before:

Sprints were derailed and engineers were whipsawed whenever marketing got new information.
After:

Marketing shares new information when work is reviewed biweekly.
Before:

No Team had ever completed a Sprint without interruption.
After:

During the engagement, the Division delivered software with the prescribed feature set as scheduled.
Learning To Stack Marshmallows Iteratively
How did this group pull off a successful Agile transformation on such a broad scale? The insiders credit some complex global logistical coordination, top-down and organization-wide buy-in, and Cprime’s approach for large-scale Agile Governance.

Thompson documented that approach in a 2013 paper called Recipes for Agile Governance in the Enterprise (RAGE). Agile Program Management according to the RAGE model relies on key Ceremonies such as the Release Planning meeting, Team Scrum-of-Scrums meetings, Product Owner Scrum-of-Scrums meetings, Release Backlog Grooming meetings, Release Review, and Release Retrospective meetings. It also defines Area Product Owner roles and Program Manager roles, and measures progress with Burn-Up charts.

Thompson guided Agilent through the construction of a large-scale Agile framework by helping the organization to adopt a minimal set of lightweight decision-making techniques, execute Ceremonies, establish Artifacts, and learn other Agile practices.

Simultaneously, he helped the organization identify the necessary roles and individuals to fill them and guided a restructure that integrated development and operations. “Area Product Owner and Program Manager roles are critical for maintaining alignment between business goals and Team-level development,” Thompson says. He spent five days at Agilent providing guidance on setting up a Program-Level structure, roles, and practices.

“An Area Product Owner owns the big-picture product definition, decides when to make major tradeoffs between functionality and schedule, and meets weekly with up to five Team-level Product Owners,” he explains. “A Program Manager, meanwhile, facilitates most of the Program-level Ceremonies, monitors and manages cross-Team Dependencies, and generally strives for effective execution across all Teams. That’s important, otherwise you have 14 Teams moving off in random directions and you don’t achieve your goals.”

To improve communications and enable collaboration, Cprime also migrated the entire Software & Informatics Division onto a single suite of work-tracking and collaboration tools from Atlassian.

With its “Agile for Teams” classes in Santa Clara and Waldbronn, Cprime established a common vocabulary and singular understanding of Scrum concepts. All six Teams—more than 100 software engineers—plus Scrum Masters, Team Product Owners, Area Product Owners, Program Managers and their Managers attended.

Agilent Technical Marketing Manager Shawn Anderson describes how participants warmed up to Agile thinking with the Marshmallow Challenge: “All 100 people split up into small groups and competed to erect, from spaghetti sticks and string, the tallest structure that could hold a marshmallow.” What did they learn? “The marshmallow is heavy enough to make the structure collapse, so you need to be iterative and put the marshmallow on at each stage before building your next level,” Anderson says. Waiting until your structure is finished to put the marshmallow on is like the Waterfall method of development, he says, in which “marketing writes long instructions, you develop the product, and six months later marketing looks at it and says, ‘I didn’t ask for this.'”

Getting On The Same Page
In addition to the Teams classes, in late October, Thompson led all Scrum Masters, Team Product Owners, Program Managers, Area Product Owners, and their managers in a one-day Agile Program Management class. Some attended the early-morning Santa Clara-based course in person, while others joined via video conference from Waldbronn. To ensure top down buy-in for the new approach, all Division leaders participated in a full-day Agile for Executives briefing. Thompson also coached Agilent’s three Santa Clara software Teams in Story-writing, Backlog grooming, and Sprint planning.

Simultaneous to training Agilent staff in Agile process, the JIRA setup was underway. Moving all of Agilent’s developers in Europe and the US to a single shared platform—as
well as migrating Agilent’s legacy data from Version 1 software to JIRA—would enable global access to plans, requirements, and work status across all Teams.

Stefan Weiss, who was responsible for reengineering the work tools, says Agilent had already introduced Atlassian’s Confluence collaboration tool and wanted to implement JIRA’s Agile project management tool, but needed help making the tool useful to its global team. CPrime’s JIRA expertise made it the perfect partner for coaching the transition. It trained the global interdependent Teams to rely on JIRA as an organized place to see what work was going on within a Team and across Teams, when it would be done, and which features were on schedule for the current release.

Starting at Sprint Zero
14 Agilent Teams were ready to get to work on Sprint Zero—a two-week planning session. Its outcome would be an eight-month product release plan for the Software & Informatics Division’s most complex current project—software for Agilent’s OpenLAB chromatography data system.

During the first week, Teams in Germany, France, and California worked in parallel. Another Agile coach, Bruno Orsier, R&D Team Manager from Persistent Systems, led the Teams in Agilent’s Waldbronn and Grenoble offices, while Thompson coached in Santa Clara and provided an overall organizational model and transformation structure. For the second week, all Team members and other relevant staff gathered in Santa Clara to finalize the plan.

Thompson and Orsier broke Sprint Zero activities into three categories:

Educate everyone on the business and technical goals, drivers, and high-level requirements for OpenLAB through presentations and posters.
Use the newly learned techniques to develop requirements and estimate Stories, Epics, and Defects.
Lay out Stories, Epics, and Defects on the Release Planning board, and mark all cross-Team Dependencies.
By the end of the second week, the Teams’ eight-month development plan, laid out on a giant Scrum Board, dominated an Agilent auditorium. Chevron-patterned ribbon crisscrossed an entire wall, connecting the blocks on a grid of blue masking tape. The Plan comprised 14 horizontal lanes—one per Team—and 15 vertical Sprint columns. Teams noted their Sprint Velocities for each Sprint before filling the board with Stories, Epics, and Defects. Explains Anderson, “Cprime led us through sessions where one Team would explain what they were doing, and people listening could say, ‘Oh, wait, you need this bit of information from our side to do that, so they would note a Dependency.”

Thompson held the group to several rules:

The amount of work done in a Sprint cannot exceed the Sprint’s forecasted Velocity.
Epics—high-level summaries of major deliverables—may cross Sprint boundaries as placeholders, but Stories and Defects may not. Every Story or Defect must be completed within the same Sprint in which it begins.
Every cross-Team Dependency must be denoted with the chevron-patterned ribbon pointing in the direction of Dependencies, from the predecessor Story to the successor Story.
By the end of the week, the Teams had successfully finalized a Release plan and recorded all details in JIRA. And though there were numerous “small problems and teething pains,” says Thompson, they were “the sort one would expect in new Teams, not show-stoppers.”

Through their next few Sprints, Thompson mentored the Santa Clara Teams while Orsier mentored the Waldbronn and Grenoble Teams.

Transformation Side Effects
Nine months later, members of the organization on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean use terms including “phenomenal,” “dramatic,” and “super successful” to describe their Agile transformation. Leaders are universally elated by improvements in predictability and transparency, and others inside the organization say they are happier and that overall morale has improved.

“We’ve become more disciplined at doing estimates, and the process of estimating work is getting better, so we’re becoming more and more accurate,” says Anderson. “Morale is definitely better. We schedule vacations and holidays into release plans—the natural process of Agile provides breaks as well—and everyone is happy that we’re meeting deadlines.”

Parikh says adjusted expectations throughout the organization have improved life for software developers as well as customers. “Cprime met with people at different levels in all aspects of our unit, so now everyone has the exact same expectation and can set the right expectation for the customer,” he says. “Everybody knows what is expected from them, and that makes people happy.”

It’s not that getting everyone on the same page improves the product, Parikh says, but because it improves the process, the product is enhanced.

Barber agrees: “Not only are the engineers happier, but the product teams and general management are too because products are coming out on time, we’re hitting our checkpoints, and transparency is such that when there is a problem people start working on it sooner rather than delay the release. Stuff is getting done and it’s on time. Who wouldn’t be happier?”

Goal: Baked in Debugging
What’s next? Continued progress, Agilent executives say. This year, Thompson and Orsier began training and coaching the organization’s Core Product Teams on the same Agile transition process. And the software group will improve even further.

“We’ll continue working on the next generation of software this way,” Barber says. “It’s not a switch that you flip where one day you’re doing Waterfall and the next you’re doing Agile. You work it in gradually. The introduction to Scrum is done. Now we’ll be improving our efficiency and we’ll be getting better without working on hardened Sprints.”

For instance, he explains that a lot of time for fixing bugs was “baked in” to the first release plan, with as much as 30 percent of the release time reserved for hardening. “We’re going to try to squeeze that out. A well-operating team produces fewer bugs,” Barber says.

He expects to see several more releases before the Teams are operating at top speed. Then, he predicts, “there will be evangelism and other groups within Agilent will look
to see what’s going on.”

Sadler praises the group for its progress. “For the first time in this Division’s recent history, we’re about to deliver a high-quality product with the feature set we said we would, on time, on a fixed release cycle cadence that allows us to plan out a good three years in advance with reasonable credibility. That’s dramatic.”

Still, he says, he’s not about to declare victory. His organization, he says, is going to be relentless at hunting down waste: “The goal is not to be perfect. The goal is to be better.”








Case Study #90

Company Details
Industry: Healthcare
Company Size: 100,000 employees in over 100 countries
Products: SAFe Implementation
Cprime Services:
SAFe Implementations
Agile Transformation
Certified SAFe® Release Train Engineer (RTE)
Executive Summary
Healthcare is big business, always changing, and rapidly accelerating. Technological advancements will continue to change how patient care is delivered from the hospital to the home and points in between, and the company needed a better way to deliver value. With the help of Cprime consultants and trainers, the company underwent an Agile and SAFe transformation that resulted in improved alignment, transparency, and built-in quality.


  
Overview
Business Need – Keeping Pace
Healthcare business is big business, it is changing, and it is accelerating. Technological advancements are changing and will continue to change how patient care is delivered from the hospital to the home and points in between.

Problems that led to the migration to Agile for their software development projects, while not atypical, were compelling:

Long release cycles – not keeping pace with market demands
Indeterminate release dates due to late stage integration and test, characteristic of a process heavy waterfall software development process,
Inability to get stakeholder feedback early and often; critical in developing complex systems in a complex domain,
Quality and testing – complex systems require effective and incremental testing practices to validate system behavior and demonstrate compliance.
The Challenge
Transition to Scrum
In 2013 the journey toward software Agility began. Shorter time to market, fast feedback cycles, responding to changing requirements and visibility into the development process, drove the need to transition to Scrum. Scrum teams in multiple locations – California, Massachusetts, Bangalore, and Best, Netherlands teams underwent basic Scrum team training and implemented Agile-tooling support.scrum

As teams transitioned to Scrum new roles, short sprints, Scrum ceremonies and metrics, the new process grew roots. Cultural change was starting to happen, slowly. While the waterfall thinking of long development cycles and knowing all the requirements and design details up front was fading, progress was still slow against the goals. Other problems were becoming more visible.

The Solution
The Transformation – Launching the Agile Release Trains
As with all change as progress is happening new problems arise. The teams were experiencing difficulty with geographic disperse communication and coordination, having a solid definition and prioritization of release features to be delivered in what timeframe, and lack of visibility into solution progress during the release development cycle. These are problems of scaling Agility. Addressing these problems became more acute.

The ability to execute enterprise agility led two senior program managers to investigate the Scaled Agile Framework. They became certified SAFe Program Consultants and used the SAFe Agile Release Train Launch Kit to plan and initiate the first Agile Release Train launch. The first train was a subset of the development organization and launched in September 2014.

An Agile Release Train is at the heart of the Scaled Agile Framework. An ART is a team of ScrumXP teams working on a common cadence with synchronized planning at both the sprint level and Program Increment (PI) level. The teams are aligned with a common Program level backlog of prioritized features, from which the team backlogs are derived. The teams are coordinated through four development sprints and one innovation and planning sprint at the end. These five sprints together constitute a Program Increment. The result is the teams delivering completed features every ten weeks, nominally.

The teams on the Agile Release Train meet for a face-to-face planning session to plan the four development sprints. Each team is responsible for presenting what stories will go into the development sprints and a set of Program Increment objectives. Together during the two-day session the teams identify dependencies and risks for the PI. This aspect was a major benefit. The teams were able to see potentially blocking issues, and mitigate them during planning as opposed to discovering dependency problems part way through a release cycle.

From December 2014 through May 2015 a total of three Agile Release Trains were launched and up and running on a quarterly cadence. The trains mapped to the two major product lines and one infrastructure train and encompassed the whole organization. With each planning session the teams got more and more effective in terms of teams committing to a body of work they could complete and managing the dependencies throughout the PI execution. Director of Engineering summarized “The framework has provided an explicit agreement on how to operate. With face to face planning teams are engaged and morale is high”.

The Agile transformation was dramatic. Sue Shreve, Agile Coach from Cprime, Inc. “The teams progressed much more rapidly by embracing the best practices of SAFe than they would have without. The company was open to change, had consistent management support and followed the best practices of SAFe, always. The result was success!”

The Results
Significant Speed to Market
The ability to complete key features, every quarter, was a major improvement. The shortened cycle time allowed the product and sales teams to now validate and get feedback on implementation so that when a release went into production it was addressing. They now have a customer engagement model that allows customers to see, on a predictable schedule, new features and give critical feedback. Global Director Marketing and Strategy remarked on his company’s ability to complete features, now in a timely way “We are delivering features so fast that Sales and Support is having to now keep up”.

Alignment
The teams are now aligned to a common program level backlog. The Product Management team is prioritizing the features based customer demands and economic rationale, on a quarterly basis. Product Management now has a tighter coupling to their Product Owner counterparts. The face to face planning is allowing them to spot and manage dependencies much more effectively.

Magnifying_Glass_EmailTransparency
Because of the new Agile metrics and a very effective Scrum of Scrums team (representatives from each scrum team meeting twice a week) there is visibility and coordination between the teams. The right people make decisions tactically, in a timely way.

Built-in Quality
Building quality in through the mechanisms of Scrum and SAFe has gotten them away from a long integration cycle and defect fixing late in a release cycle.

Program Execution
The agile release trains are running. Synchronized planning, coordination through Scrum of Scrums, Inspect and Adapt workshops is the way it is done

On The Horizon
The company is continuing their Agile transformation. There is now a full-time internal Agile coach. There are plans to enable better in development practices such at test driven development and continuous integration. Smoothing out the bumps in the flow of value delivery is now moving upstream and downstream of the software development – a positive sign of progress.










Case Study #91

Company Details
Industry: Semiconductors
Company Size: 22,000 Employees
Location: South Korea
Cprime Services:
SAFe Transformation
SAFe For Teams
PI Planning & Consulting
Executive Summary
SK Hynix wanted to optimize their Value Streams by empowering people to self organize. They needed to improve product delivery processes while being mindful of people's opinions within the organization. With the help of Cprime consultants and trainers, they underwent a SAFe transformation that resulted in improved transparency and predictability, and a significant reduction in defects.


  
The Challenge
Optimizing SKHMS’s Value Stream
SKHMS leadership analyzed how to optimize the Value Stream (flow of information and material from concept to customer) by empowering people to self-organize around the work. This strategy moved the organization away from cost centers and functional groups, to one allocated budget per train to help deliver the Value Stream. For example, think of a new expansion NFL Football team. When putting together a new football team with the goal to win the Superbowl, players, coaches, and domain experts are carefully selected. The goal is to put together the right mix of people based on availability, budget, skillset, team affinity, etc. Based on this strategy, they act as a cohesive unit instead of separate entities that are forced together. In the case with SK Hynix Memory Solutions, the value stream was to deliver best of breed, enterprise class solid state drives with industry standard interfaces. As part of this value stream, SKHMS leadership also dedicated a team of experts to test the various aspects of the firmware; from emulations to hardware in the lab, to qualification.

SAFe Pilot
SKHMS leadership, with Cprime’s recommendation, chose SAFe as the Agile framework because it addressed the complexity issues often associated with firmware development. For example, planning required and delivered for feature development. Therefore, the Agile Pilot kicked off with 5 Scrum teams and roughly 50 people to support the Agile Release Train. The product selected for the pilot was based on risk level, preparation work in place such as architecture, and enough features to span multiple program increments. SKHMS leadership did start with Scrum teams being component based versus cross-functional. For example, component teams for:



Encrypted Storage
Host
FTL (Flash Transition Layer)
NAND Device Driver
Platform
Cross-functional teams were discussed, but careful consideration and analysis indicated more in-efficiencies and coordination than being productive. However, the goal is to learn from the current Scrum teams to what is the most optimal for product delivery

For the pilot, the Scrum teams were distributed across San Jose, CA, and Longmont, CO, but most of the Scrum team were collocated in one geographical location.

SKHMS leadership designed the Program Increments to be 3 months long (once a quarter) and followed a two week iteration cycle. Before starting the first PI Planning, there was a list of preparation work that needed to get done. This work was folded into Iteration 0. From cPrime’s experience, Iteration 0 needed roughly 1 week for a 3 month initiative. Since this was a 1 year pilot, SKHMS leadership agreed to one month to get prepared for launching the first Agile Release Train (ART).

SKHMS leadership also decoupled the Hardware group from the Firmware Agile Release Train because their work was not conducive to two week iterations with the Scrum Teams. Instead the Hardware group worked in a Kanban like fashion with SLAs on their work based on the Backlog prioritization. For example, knowing what features were coming down the pipe, they were able to prioritize their own work and in some cases, put out proto-hardware for testing purposes during the Program Increment. This coordination was possible because representatives from the Hardware group attended critical program level meetings as stakeholders and because they were part of the value stream for delivering the product.

The Solution
Program Backlog Prioritization
The Product Management in conjunction with the Firmware Architect came up with the initial list of Program Epics and Features for the Program Backlog. These Epic/Features were prioritized using Lead Time and prioritization. To be more specific we looked at the Cost of Delay and job duration associated with each work item in the backlog. In particular, looked at the attributes on the next page for Cost of Delay and assigned points accordingly using the modified Fibonacci scale.

Since features and architecture design required in-depth analysis, it was very difficult to create user and technical stories. At the same time, the design analysis required lead time given the complexity and resource gap. With this challenge, the Scrum teams decided to create Spikes to represent architecture and high level design work in the team’s backlogs. Based on upcoming feature prioritization and the intentional architecture strategy, the Product Owners were able to collaborate with their dev teams to create Spikes. Spikes were prioritized based on when the features had to be implemented. For example, if implementation of feature X was in Sprint 5, then the Scrum teams planned for the Spikes before Sprint 5. To further improve quality and limit costly redesigns, these spikes had a review component to it where key stakeholders of the dev team and external reviewers had to provide the necessary feedback.

The feedback from the reviews were discussed during backlog grooming, which was scheduled on a bi-weekly cadence as part of the Sprint design. In some cases, the architecture runway had to be implemented before feature development. In this scenario, technical stories were implemented to create the runway before the user stories for feature development started.

Program Increment (PI) Planning
Executive management was committed to the execution, and enabled everyone to fly to San Jose, California for the 2 day PI planning. This helped ensure that each team achieved an approved draft plan for the next 3 months’ worth of work with measurable, aligned objectives.

Continous Intergration
Perforce is a source code management and content collaboration software. For CI Builds, Bamboo with Perforce was chosen to meet the many operational challenges inherent in component-based development, provide enterprise-class version management for distributed teams of chip designers, engineers, developers, and testers using a wide range of design and development tools.

The Results
A Change Felt Throughout the Entire Organization
By taking a pragmatic approach to initiating an organizational change to help improve the product delivery processes, being mindful of people’s roles and opinions, SKHMS leadership was able to kick off an Agile Transformation that people felt good about.






Case Study #92

Company Details
Industry: Financial Services
Company Size: 265,000
Location: CA, US
Cprime Services:
Agile Services
Jira Consulting
Executive Summary
With the pressure of financial application complexities, this company realizes faster releases and predictability are needed in order to keep up with the constant changes in the industry. They call upon Cprime to help create a collaborative culture within the company, resulting in better coordination, communication, and transparency.


  
Overview
Straight from the Program Manager’s Mouth
In an effort to understand our customer’s experience with Cprime, I’ve set out to conduct several interviews with key clients to understand the reasons for why they chose to go Agile, why they selected Cprime as a vendor and what they have noticed as the biggest benefit from performance improvement since the engagements.

The interview below is with the Program Manager of one of the world’s largest financial services organizations. The Program Manager orchestrates all the development and direction of all applications in the Capital Finance group. Here is their story.

The Challenges
Creating Better Communication Within a Complex System
Communication
“The biggest challenges were the communication between the teams. There was degradation in communication, in the culture of the teams. They were definitely really down in the doldrums I guess you could say.”

Inflexible releases
“We have quite a few products, and just getting them all on the same page for a release was difficult with a very waterfall fashion. It was very structured and if anybody was behind, it created almost a domino effect.”

Lacking Transparency
“Because there wasn’t a lot of transparency either and that really hurt the teams because we’re removed from each other. You start to assume some incorrect things about people and about what’s going on and then, you extrapolate.”

Complexity of Systems
“Since it’s a financial system of record, it adds another layer of complexity on top of having the application work with five other applications.”

Choosing Agile
The Capital group knew they needed a change and a change fast. They had a dysfunctional environment and it was hurting their performance. They decided to do something about it.

“We had actually got a focus group together because everybody was down in the doldrums, and when I was running through that focus group, all these pain points were listed on a big spreadsheet of what everybody was dealing with, whether it was poor communication or mistrust or the releases were inflexible.”

“One of the ideas that we threw out there was to try a new process because anything’s better than what we got right now.”

The Solution
Choosing Cprime
The Program Manager of the Capital Group evaluated three agile services companies. They chose Cprime because:

Coaches Expertise
“I wasn’t looking for the cheapest. I was looking for someone that’s going to do it right because this was my opportunity to make a change. I rather get it done the right way.”

Understanding of Unique Needs
“The half-day assessment was something that the other companies didn’t have baked in. Cprime wanted to understand our special circumstances.”

Responsiveness
“I’m told from my senior manager, “Make it happen,” so even the responsiveness of having someone email you back within a day was really helpful.”

The Value of Coaching
“One of the pitches wanted to do a standard two-day training session, but they didn’t actually talk about doing coaching at all and the value of that afterwards. Cprime didn’t seem to either upsell or try to downplay the importance of coaching. They just put it out there and said, “Hey, here’s what you really need to do this and to do it right.”

Finding a Plan and Executing
Cprime prescribed a full transformation for Capital Finance group with 80 people total.

Assessment
They conducted an initial assessment to understand the pains of the group and formulate a transformation backlog. They presented their findings to the teams and to get buy-in from executives and stakeholders.

Training
Cprime lead training courses for 45 people on the west coast and 30 on the east coast. They conducted three main pieces of training to align the Capital group’s teams:

Agile for Teams
Requirements Workshops
ALM Tool Training
Coaching
After the trainings, they received ongoing coaching for their sprints after the training. Coaching reinforced what the teams had learned in training.

“We tried to make sure that we got everybody on the same page and it was really helpful we could get the same coach to help us out in a consistent manner”

The Results
What was the Outcome?
Improved Predictability

“I would say the biggest benefit is more predictable releases right now and there’s definitely more of a cadence with the team.”

Better Communication
“There’s better communication and the culture has definitely improved.”

Increased Transparency
“That transparency is increased and that’s helped even when there are issues. That’s helped to at least make them acceptable or a bit more understandable when you understand that each day, you’re getting an update on what it is and how it’s progressing.”

Coordination Among Teams
“Probably the biggest thing that we took away is really the most practical of things, meeting on a daily basis, meeting in between teams and having that coordination, using better tools such as using Jira as an example to help keep people on the same track.”











Case Study #93

Company Details
Industry: Information Technology
Company Size: 50 Employees
Location: CA, US
Cprime Services:
Agile Consulting
Certified Scrum Master Workshop
Executive Summary
Wiredrive needed to resolve competing business focuses and their traditional "waterfall" created inefficiencies. Cprime consultants and trainers helped them with an extensive Agile transformation focused on Scrum. With a far faster, more efficient development process, Wiredrive is geared up for the future.


  
Overview
Making the Big Move From Waterfall to Scrum
Wiredrive faced two major problems that had been years in the making. The first was that it had two competing business focuses: custom Web design; and online file-sharing services. Both provided revenues, but while the long-term potential of the latter was larger, the attention devoted to the former slowed progress on the file-sharing service. The second was difficulty in planning and implementing new capabilities for the file-sharing service. The company’s “Waterfall” process worked, but its pace and flexibility proved disappointing. Motivated by the second problem, the company decided to migrate from their existing Waterfall process, to Scrum.

The year-long transition succeeded because all company stakeholders bought into the need and sustained the commitment over the time required to work through the challenges. Wiredrive’s new Scrum process increased visibility into all aspects of software development. Surprisingly, this visibility brought new clarity to business issues, as well as to development priorities.

As a result, the company decided to re-write the file-sharing application to improve flexibility, and to terminate the custom Web design service in favor of the file-sharing business. Wiredrive adopted Scrum as a tactic to improve the company’s ability to develop software, but found that it also enabled strategic business decisions that provided major benefits. As a result, Wiredrive considers the transition to Scrum to be a success.

The Challenge
Business Focus
In the early years, Wiredrive provided a custom Web-development service, in addition to the filesharing service. The split focus impaired the company’s ability to grow revenues. While the Web-development work brought in money on a time-and-materials basis, the file-sharing business provided a continuing revenue stream that was not restricted by billable hours. The file-sharing business was more profitable, but resource contention from the other service crippled its growth.

Technical Debt from Legacy Code
Several years of development work grew the file-sharing codebase dramatically from its initial implementation. Under constant pressure to add new capabilities, the development team did so at the expense of design. The result was a codebase whose design evolved more by accretion than intent. The haphazard accumulation of “bolted on” code caused fragility. Poor design made adding new features difficult, and led to numerous defects, often in areas that seemed unrelated. Even worse, the company was unable to ensure quality before releasing the service to customers, and experienced an unacceptable level of complaints.



Unsuccessful Development Process
Wiredrive used the common “Waterfall” process to plan and execute software development. A typical Waterfall process contains the following major stages:

Requirements: Product Managers write requirements specifications
Design: Software architects or senior engineers write design documents that describe how the requirements
are to be implemEnted
Execution
Testing and Fixing
Release: IT Operations deploys the application for customer use
While the process was well-defined and seemed reasonable on paper, it proved unsatisfactory in practice. The company could not deliver the desired features on anything resembling the planned schedule. Projects that were expected to take three months might take as long as eighteen.

While the process was well-defined and seemed reasonable on paper, it proved unsatisfactory in practice. The company could not deliver the desired features on anything resembling the planned schedule. Projects that were expected to take three months might take as long as eighteen.

Many factors contributed to the unsatisfactory performance:

Distractions from the custom Web-development service interfered with company and development focus
Requirements were often too big and ambitious for implementation to be practical
Requirements were often not well-enough defined to support estimation and implementation, and clarification caused churn that impacted the schedule
Even when requirements were understood reasonably well, estimates were imprecise, and work did not proceed according to the schedule
Scope creep and change requests disrupted the planned work, and delayed its completion
Software defects generated high-priority customer requests for fixes, which diverted resources from development work
As a result, the company was unable to plan and implement features in a meaningful way. Wiredrive’s customers perceived the company as unresponsive to their needs, unreliable in its promises, and unable to provide acceptable quality.

The Solution
Solving the Focus Problem
The solution was straightforward, in principle: Drop one line of business and focus effort on the more profitable one. Wiredrive’s challenges were in recognizing the degree to which the split focus was slowing progress, and having enough revenues to be able to drop the less-valuable business.

The company’s effort to improve their development process improved visibility not only into development, but with respect to business priorities. It became clear that progress in the filesharing area could only occur if the custom Web-development business was terminated.

At about this same time, the company’s financial position became secure enough that it was able to make the decision to close the Web-development business. This closure enabled the company to focus on the more profitable file-sharing business, and complete its migration to an agile development process.

Wiredrive’s President, Bill Sewell, had been hearing about the Scrum process for agile development for years. The principles of agile development sounded good. As the Agile Manifesto put it.



Bill liked the emphasis on people and results over process, and the idea that the company could become more responsive to customers. One particular agile process, Scrum, seemed particularly appropriate for the company’s needs. The challenge was in making the change happen. The Scrum process defined a particular set of practices that promised to help the company achieve this new agility, but at the cost of radically changing almost everything about how Wiredrive planned and executed its software development.

The Beginning
The first step towards a Scrum process occurred when Stefan Leikin, who managed development of the file-sharing software, attended a Certified Scrum Master Workshop. Stefan not only attended the class, but arrived early, stayed late, and took lunch-time opportunities to talk with instructor Scott Downey. Scott taught Scrum and served as Head Agile Coach for MySpace.com. He provided a wealth of practical experience in his conversations with Stefan. Stefan was sufficiently impressed with Scott that Wiredrive invited Scott to do some on-site training for members of the engineering team. Before leaving, Scott asked the students if they were excited about Scrum, or dreading it. Stefan recalls that everyone was “pumped” at the prospect of using Scrum to manage their development work.

The Plunge
One advantage Wiredrive had in making its transition to Scrum was its size: The company had fewer than forty people, and only six in the development group. Bill, Stefan, Taylor Tyng (the Product Manager), the CTO, and the development team members were unanimous in believing that Scrum was the right choice. In less than two years, all of the stakeholders had committed to the Scrum process, and the company conducted its first Scrum “Sprint.”

The Transition
The major challenges faced by the development team were in three areas: Mastering Scrum, Keeping Commitments, and Managing Technical Debt.

Mastering Scrum
While the practices of Scrum are not complex, most are unfamiliar, and learning the full set is a challenge. Scrum projects repeat their “cadence” of activities every Sprint (development cycle, two weeks for Wiredrive). Each activity must occur at its specified time, because the process is tightly choreographed. Missing any step can impact the team’s productivity dramatically.

Successful Scrum projects must go beyond learning the practices to master the choreography, until it becomes second nature. For Wiredrive, this degree of mastery occurred after about eight Sprints

Keeping Commitments
Each time the development team planned a Sprint, the team committed to a specific scope. This commitment was possible because the team knew from past experience how much work it could do in a Sprint, and estimated the amount of work needed to implement the selected requirements. Wiredrive’s metric for a Sprint’s success was whether the team implemented the planned scope. By this definition, the team had its first success in Sprint 13. This success was followed by eight failures.

Results improved gradually, until by Sprint 30 they’d had five successful Sprints in a row.

Managing Technical Debt
The fragility of Wiredrive’s software had reached the point where further development was impractical. The development team advocated “going dark” to re-design and re-implement the software, before trying to add more features. Bill describes himself as the last person who wanted to hear about the need to “go dark,” and not “shoehorn 2—3 more features to get us out in front of the marketplace,” but the team found that attempts to add more features kept breaking the application. After much discussion, the company decided to address the technical debt.

The Results
Making Sacrifices Now for Long Term Benefits
Wiredrive did “go dark.” The development team implemented a clean-sheet design to provide a platform for future development, and created extensive automated tests to enable quick assessment of product quality. This process took months, during which the company provided no new features to customers. The decision paid off, in terms of software stability and quality, and the company has been able to resume feature development with much less breakage.

Wiredrive’s transition to a Scrum development process was successful. The company is able to plan and execute software development more reliably than it could before, and while becoming more responsive to customer requests. Nine-month development cycles are thing of the past, along with the technical debt and split focus that hampered the company’s ability to move forward. More than anything else, the key contribution of the Scrum process was to make visible all of the problems, constraints, and trade-offs that could previously be ignored or deferred. The new visibility brought discomfort, as the company had to make a number of painful decisions in short order, but the benefits have been profound.




